I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 17 December 1999, and I would like once again to wish you a happy new year in the hope that you enjoyed a pleasant festive period.
Although, as you will have seen, the dreaded 'millennium bug' failed to materialise, still the people in a number of countries suffered a series of natural disasters that truly were dreadful. You have requested a debate on this subject in the course of the next few days, during this part-session. In the meantime, I should like to observe a minute' s silence, as a number of Members have requested, on behalf of all the victims concerned, particularly those of the terrible storms, in the various countries of the European Union. Please rise, then, for this minute' s silence.
Madam President, on a point of order. You will be aware from the press and television that there have been a number of bomb explosions and killings in Sri Lanka. One of the people assassinated very recently in Sri Lanka was Mr Kumar Ponnambalam, who had visited the European Parliament just a few months ago. Would it be appropriate for you, Madam President, to write a letter to the Sri Lankan President expressing Parliament's regret at his and the other violent deaths in Sri Lanka and urging her to do everything she possibly can to seek a peaceful reconciliation to a very difficult situation?
Yes, Mr Evans, I feel an initiative of the type you have just suggested would be entirely appropriate. If the House agrees, I shall do as Mr Evans has suggested.
Madam President, on a point of order. I would like your advice about Rule 143 concerning inadmissibility. My question relates to something that will come up on Thursday and which I will then raise again.
The Cunha report on multiannual guidance programmes comes before Parliament on Thursday and contains a proposal in paragraph 6 that a form of quota penalties should be introduced for countries which fail to meet their fleet reduction targets annually. It says that this should be done despite the principle of relative stability. I believe that the principle of relative stability is a fundamental legal principle of the common fisheries policy and a proposal to subvert it would be legally inadmissible. I want to know whether one can raise an objection of that kind to what is merely a report, not a legislative proposal, and whether that is something I can competently do on Thursday.
That is precisely the time when you may, if you wish, raise this question, i.e. on Thursday prior to the start of the presentation of the report.
Madam President, coinciding with this year' s first part-session of the European Parliament, a date has been set, unfortunately for next Thursday, in Texas in America, for the execution of a young 34 year-old man who has been sentenced to death. We shall call him Mr Hicks.
At the request of a French Member, Mr Zimeray, a petition has already been presented, which many people signed, including myself. However, I would ask you, in accordance with the line which is now constantly followed by the European Parliament and by the whole of the European Community, to make representations, using the weight of your prestigious office and the institution you represent, to the President and to the Governor of Texas, Mr Bush, who has the power to order a stay of execution and to reprieve the condemned person.
This is all in accordance with the principles that we have always upheld.
Thank you, Mr Segni, I shall do so gladly. Indeed, it is quite in keeping with the positions this House has always adopted.
Madam President, I should like to draw your attention to a case in which this Parliament has consistently shown an interest. It is the case of Alexander Nikitin. All of us here are pleased that the courts have acquitted him and made it clear that in Russia, too, access to environmental information is a constitutional right. Now, however, he is to go before the courts once more because the public prosecutor is appealing. We know, and we have stated as much in very many resolutions indeed, including specifically during the last plenary part-session of last year, that this is not solely a legal case and that it is wrong for Alexander Nikitin to be accused of criminal activity and treason because of our involvement as the beneficiaries of his findings. These findings form the basis of the European programmes to protect the Barents Sea, and that is why I would ask you to examine a draft letter setting out the most important facts and to make Parliament's position, as expressed in the resolutions which it has adopted, clear as far as Russia is concerned.
Yes, Mrs Schroedter, I shall be pleased to look into the facts of this case when I have received your letter.
Madam President, I would firstly like to compliment you on the fact that you have kept your word and that, during this first part-session of the new year, the number of television channels in our offices has indeed increased considerably. But, Madam President, my personal request has not been met. Although there are now two Finnish channels and one Portuguese one, there is still no Dutch channel, which is what I had requested because Dutch people here like to be able to follow the news too when we are sent to this place of exile every month. I would therefore once more ask you to ensure that we get a Dutch channel as well.
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, I can tell you that this matter is on the agenda for the Quaestors' meeting on Wednesday. It will, I hope, be examined in a positive light.
Madam President, can you tell me why this Parliament does not adhere to the health and safety legislation that it actually passes? Why has no air quality test been done on this particular building since we were elected? Why has there been no Health and Safety Committee meeting since 1998? Why has there been no fire drill, either in the Brussels Parliament buildings or the Strasbourg Parliament buildings? Why are there no fire instructions? Why have the staircases not been improved since my accident? Why are no-smoking areas not enforced? It seems absolutely disgraceful that we pass legislation and do not adhere to it ourselves.
Mr President, I respond to an invitation yesterday afternoon by the President of the House to speak on behalf of my group on a matter referred to in the Minutes. I refer to item 11 on the order of business.
Firstly, I believe the issue raised by the President of the Socialist Group yesterday about the reinstatement of the debate with the President of the Commission on the five-year strategic programme was sufficiently important for other speakers who wished to comment briefly on that matter to have been accommodated. I wish to express that view even if I respectfully disagreed and voted against the proposal of the President of the Socialist Group.
The second point I would like to make - and which I would have wished to make yesterday before the vote - is that this Parliament, as other speakers remarked yesterday, can only really have an effect if it works in close cooperation and synergy with the European Commission. We should also have the humility to recognise that, if we wanted to have a strategic debate accompanied not just by a presentation and elucidation by the President of the Commission, but also by a five-year programme, we should have the mechanisms in place more than just a week in advance of the debate in this House, so as to be able to discuss and convey in due time to the Commission what our wishes were.
There is one basic lesson I would like us to learn from this. When there are major set-piece debates scheduled between this House and the European Commission in the future, we should clear all of our lines on what are our mutual expectations at least one full working month in advance. There needs firstly to be clarity between all of the groups of this House and then between this House and the Commission. We should not find ourselves late in the day in the unfortunate position where the one or other institution creates an unnecessary fracture in institutional relationships.
Looking at some of the press reports of last Friday, I believe that the Commission and its President exercised commendable self-restraint in the way they commented publicly. That is something for which I have a deep appreciation. I hope that we will learn the lessons and not repeat this unnecessary exercise which I believe was founded on a misapprehension as to what was expected rather than any bad faith on the part of either of the two institutions. It should not be dramatised into something more than that.
Thank you very much, Mr Cox. I understand what you are saying. We have taken note of this.
Mr President, concerning item 11 of the Minutes on the order of business, we agreed yesterday to have the Bourlanges report on today's agenda. However, it was withdrawn from the Committee on Budgets last night without being discussed or voted on. It therefore needs to be withdrawn from today's agenda.
Mr Wynn, that makes sense. The report is hereby withdrawn from the agenda.
Mr President, regarding Mrs Lynne's comments yesterday about health and safety in this building, I presume she was talking about the drains because there is a dreadful smell of drains on the fifth floor in the Tower. This needs to be looked into because it is clearly an indication that something is seriously wrong. I do not want to drag up the issue of this building endlessly, but this is a serious problem.
Mrs Ahern, we have taken note of this. I would ask you to bring this specific case, which has to do with the ventilators on a particular floor, to the attention of the Quaestors, who are, in fact, responsible for the matter. We will also pass this on to our services, however. Thank you very much.
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0069/1999 by Mr von Wogau, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission White Paper on modernisation of the rules implementing Articles 85 and 86 of the EC Treaty [COM(1999) 101 - C5-0105/1999 - 1999/2108(COS)];
A5-0078/1999 by Mr Rapkay, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the European Commission' s XXVIIIth Report on Competition Policy 1998 [SEK(1999) 743 - C5-0121/1999 - 1999/2124(COS)];
A5-0087/1999 by Mr Jonckheer, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the seventh survey on state aid in the European Union in the manufacturing and certain other sectors. [COM(1999) 148 - C5-0107/1999 - 1999/2110(COS)] (Report 1995-1997);
A5-0073/1999 by Mr Langen, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission Report on the implementation in 1998 of Commission Decision No. 2496/96/ECSC of 18 December 1996 establishing Community rules for State aid to the steel industry (Steel Aid Code). [COM(1999) 94 - C5-0104/1999 - 1999/2107(COS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission' s White Paper on modernisation of the European competition rules has ignited intense and lively debate amongst interested members of the public. The reactions from experts and persons affected range from complete rejection to unconditional support. What is this White Paper, in fact, about?
The existing system of European competition rules was set up in the early years of the Community. This system, which is based on a centralised application and approvals procedure, was certainly appropriate for the conditions prevailing at the time. This procedure made a substantial contribution to the development of a European competition culture. However, the framework conditions have fundamentally changed in the 40 years since it came into being. The Community of 6 has enlarged to one of 15 and is set to undergo further enlargement to encompass 27 members. But the system has hardly changed at all.
The next item is the continuation of the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East peace process.
I am very grateful to the President of the Council for the statement this morning on the Middle East at the beginning of this debate and for hearing some of Minister Gama' s insights, as he arrived hot-foot from the region. My only regret is that my own commitment to open the European Reconstruction Agency on Monday meant that I could not take part myself in that trip to the Middle East, even though, as I mentioned earlier in the day - which is another story - events conspired to maroon me at Munich airport rather than transport me to Thessaloniki. Such is life.
I hope that honourable Members will excuse me if I am not able to stay to the end of the debate as I would, in all normal circumstances, wish to do. The debate was fixed for this morning and on that basis I had arranged to see visitors from the Balkans this evening. So I hope I can count on the understanding of the House on this occasion. It is not something, I assure you, which I would wish to make a practice of.
Like honourable Members, I welcome the United States' efforts that have relaunched the Syrian/Israeli negotiations, despite the Syrian decision that they needed more time before resuming the talks that were scheduled to start again today. There is reasonable hope that a basis for a peace agreement can be built in the near future. I also hope that progress in the Syrian track will pave the way for an early resumption of Lebanese/Israeli talks which could then advance in parallel towards an overall deal on Israel's relations with its northern neighbours.
At the same time we must not lose sight of the Palestinian track. The situation of the Palestinians has always been the core issue of the conflict. A fair and, indeed, generous deal with them remains the key to lasting peace in the Middle East. Israelis and Palestinians have made substantial progress in implementing the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum. Although there has been some slippage, I trust that the remaining Israeli troop redeployments will materialise soon.
Similarly, despite the indication the day before yesterday that the timetable for the Framework Agreement on permanent status has been pushed beyond the mid-February deadline, I very much hope that the much more important September deadline for the final agreement on permanent status will be reached. I was reassured that this was also the view of Prime Minister Barak and President Arafat, when they met on Monday.
Honourable Members will know that one particular concern of ours has been that there should be a resumption of progress on the multilateral track. This is far from straightforward but we will do what we can to make this possible, in close liaison with the US and Russian co-sponsors as well as the regional parties. We are charged with particular responsibility for the promotion of regional economic development.
The beginning of the talks with Syria paved the way for a convening of the multilateral steering group in Moscow at the end of the month. I look forward to attending that meeting and hope that at last we can begin to push things forward again.
The European Union has an important role to play in the peace process, as all sides - Palestinians, Israelis, their Arab neighbours and the United States - have acknowledged.
Nor is our role confined to that of banker. We must be prepared to act swiftly to support the consolidation of peace in the region. But we should not kid ourselves: a comprehensive Middle East peace deal comes with a hefty price tag.
The Commission is already considering the implications for the European Union of the recent encouraging developments. We intend to share our more detailed thoughts on the matter with Parliament and Council soon. But let me remind honourable Members that the European Union is no slouch when it comes to financial support for the peace process. We are the largest of all donors to the Palestinians. We have also offered very substantial support to Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and Egypt. With the Israelis we have established closer cooperation in a number of areas of particular interest to them.
The Community contribution of over EUR 600 million in grants and loans between 1994 and 1998 effectively underpinned the Palestinian authority and contributed substantially towards the reconstruction of the deteriorated physical infrastructure in the West Bank and Gaza. European Union Member States together contributed another EUR 860 million during that crucial period.
In this context, let me applaud the important steps that the Palestinian authority has recently taken to improve budgetary transparency. President Arafat will be meeting the Council of Ministers next week. This will be a good opportunity to address the need to take similarly courageous steps to improve the Palestinian administration and to bolster the rule of law. The Commission is actively involved in those efforts.
The Commission has also stepped up its planned support for regional cooperation projects between Israelis and Arabs. We committed more than EUR 20 million for such projects last year. This package included renewed assistance for people-to-people activities and cross-border cooperation where Israelis and Arabs meet on non-governmental and expert levels. Members will recall that the European Union is the largest financial donor to the overall efforts in bringing reconciliation to the people of the Middle East.
A number of issues naturally emerge as additional potential targets of Community support in the coming phase of the peace process - among them, helping to consolidate a Golan settlement both in terms of contributing to security arrangements and supporting demining and the rebuilding of communities in the Golan Heights. Syrian economic development will need assistance for the transition from a wartime to a peace economy. Reconstruction and rehabilitation of southern Lebanon, the only Middle Eastern area with an ongoing military conflict, will also demand considerable efforts. We also need to continue our support for economic reform and social development in Lebanon as a whole. A solution is needed to the Palestinian refugee problem - these are the largest group of refugees in the world, numbering nearly 5 million people - an indication of the enormous challenges ahead. We must support initiatives increasing the availability and improving the distribution and management of the region's very scarce water resources.
Lastly, but maybe most importantly, we are encouraging closer regional cooperation in a number of areas, bringing all the countries concerned together in a joint endeavour to address their common problems.
It is already apparent that the financial resources currently available for Community assistance to this part of the world will not be sufficient for the magnitude of support that will be required in the event of permanent peace. I want to underline that point. I wish insistently to remind the Council and, should it be necessary, Parliament, that we should not continue to allow a gap to develop between our rhetoric and what we are actually capable of doing.
I repeat that a change in the politics of the Middle East will require a gear change in the support that we shall be asked and expected to provide. I hope I can add that we will want to provide that.
We have made progress in recent months and weeks, as Mr Gama mentioned earlier. But it is inevitably going to be a tough process with difficulties and disappointments on the way. We will do all we can to help the process to a successful conclusion and to meet the obligations and challenges that will be created by that outcome.
Lastly, I will repeat for some who have entered the Chamber in the last few minutes, what I said at the outset of my remarks: that I will not be able to stay until the end of the debate, largely as a result of having assumed that the debate was taking place this morning and having fixed a meeting on the Balkans for this evening. I hope the House will understand that.
Mr President, Commissioner Patten has our understanding. I would like to tell him that communications with Madrid are usually more fluid and, therefore, I hope to see him there soon.
The statements we have heard today on the Middle East peace process are very opportune at the moment because of the hurried tour which Minister Gama - whose absence from this debate I also regret - has made of the region, accompanied by other Council representatives. The tone of the news in the media on the recent events in the area could lead us to take a pessimistic view of the situation. I honestly believe that an evaluation of this type would not be in accordance with the reality of that situation. In this sense, I share Commissioner Patten' s positive attitude. Let me explain: it is true that the Israeli Government has delayed the third hand-over of West Bank territory to the Palestinian authorities. It is also true, however, that, since the signing of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreements, 39% of the territory of the West Bank has been handed over to the Palestinian National Authority, together with two thirds of the Gaza Strip and, more importantly, this agreement has so far been scrupulously complied with, since, under the terms laid down in Sharm el-Sheikh, the Israeli Government has the right to delay that handover. This is naturally on the condition that the delay does not exceed three weeks, as Prime Minister Barak has promised.
On the other hand, the decision to delay the second round of talks, initiated in Shepherdstown by the Syrian Arab Republic, is undoubtedly significant, but I am convinced that the hopes which were raised on 3 January in that town will not be dashed.
Mr President, the fact that the different groups in this Parliament are tabling a motion for a resolution, in this ever controversial debate, which is the result of a broad consensus, seems to me to demonstrate the clear political will to decisively support open peace processes. I would therefore like, equally firmly, to express our rejection of the use of violence to resolve differences, which are still no doubt profound, between the parties.
In my judgement, this constitutes a guarantee to both sides, both from a political and a financial point of view, of the commitment they can expect from the European Union in terms of its contribution to the cost of the peace which we all long for. It is clear to everyone that this is essential to guaranteeing security in the area and to cooperating in the development which is needed to heal the serious social differences which exist. But this also serves to make a claim, on the part of the European Union, for a degree of political participation in the process which is consistent with its economic contribution - we do not have aspirations to be bankers - and which will be suitably visible to the public. There is absolutely no doubt that the forthcoming trip by the President of the European Parliament to the region will contribute to this.
Mr President, I want to thank Commissioner Patten for his detailed account. I should like to say that I agree with the tone which Galeote Quecedo' s speech set here. We in Parliament strongly support the Middle East peace process. It is, of course, a peace process which is finally under way. If we think of how the process was looking a year ago, the difference between then and now is like that between night and day, despite difficulties and delays.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 21 January 2000.
Madam President, allow me to remind you that tomorrow will be the second anniversary of the Cermis tragedy. Two years ago, in Cavalese in Italy, an American aeroplane from the Aviano NATO base cut through the cables of a cable car during a low-flying exercise which exceeded safe limits, causing the deaths of more than 20 Europeans. Since then, the victims' families, who have not had the consolation of justice, since the pilot responsible has not faced criminal charges, have been awaiting solicitous financial compensation from the United States at the very least.
I therefore appeal to the President of this House and the President of the Commission for them to stand surety for immediate compensation from the U.S. authorities, and this is in order to uphold the rights of the victims' families.
Mrs Angelilli, thank you. I have taken note of your comment.
The next item is the order of business. Following a request to this effect, which I have received from a number of political groups, and following the meeting of the Conference of Presidents which has just been held, I propose that we add to the agenda a one and a half hour debate on a topical and urgent subject of major importance, pursuant to Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure, on the subject of the European Union' s reaction with regard to the talks in Austria on forming a government.
If you decide to add this debate to the agenda, it will be introduced by speeches from Mr Seixas da Costa, President-in-Office of the Council, and Mr Romano Prodi, President of the Commission.
Is there anyone who wishes to speak in favour of this proposal?
Madam President, I would like to express my support for the decision of the Conference of Presidents, and, since I publicly criticised the presidency in January, I would like to take this opportunity to say, both for myself and on behalf of the Socialist Group, that we now find the presidency' s statements on this issue to be appropriate, and we agree on their basis, their importance and their form.
Madam President, it would really be very difficult to imagine a debate which is more in accordance with Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure. This debate is topical, exceptionally important and urgent. We therefore believe that the agenda should be amended to include it.
Is there anyone who wishes to speak against this proposal?
Madam President, I shall speak against this proposal on the grounds of a principle which I consider absolutely vital with regard to observance of the Treaties, and with particular regard to Article 7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Madam President, until now we believed that the European Union was, according to the Treaty of Rome and the Treaty of Paris founding the European Communities, and subsequently the Union, an association of free, independent, sovereign states. Even though many developments cast doubt on this, we did believe, in spite of everything, that this was the case and, more recently, reference was made, albeit half-heartedly, to the principle of subsidiarity.
Well, patently, if we do open this debate today, Madam President, as you are requesting and as the Conference of Presidents is requesting, on the basis of Rule 50, we shall then be opening up a fearsome breach in the principle of the freedom and sovereignty of the national states and the free constitution of democratically elected governments, enabling some other majority in this Parliament, at some future time, to claim the right to interfere in the formation of a government even though it has assumed power on the basis of free, regular, peaceful and democratic elections within a Member State. If you ratify ...
Mr Gollnisch, excuse me, you have one minute. I know that you always take particular care to ensure that the Rules of Procedure are observed.
Madam President, I thought I had three minutes. Do forgive me.
If you ratify this development, then you are ratifying the development of the Union into a body which violates the sovereignty and the freedom of the Member States, and we should then have no option but to withdraw from such a Union.
We have heard one speaker in favour and one against. I shall now, therefore, put this proposal for an amendment to the agenda to the vote.
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading (A5-0006/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of the European Parliament and Council Directive on end-of-life vehicles [8095/1/1999 - C5-0180/1999 - 1997/0194(COD)] (Rapporteur: Mr Florenz)
Mr President, nine million cars are shredded and scrapped every year in Europe. Even though they can no longer be driven, these nine million cars may still be traded and moved across borders; and not just intra-Community borders, but also those outside the Union. It is therefore only right that the European Union should draw up Community rules on how these nine million vehicles every year are to be recycled and processed.
We believe that the directive has a few weaknesses that we in the House should work on to produce a directive which is genuinely ground-breaking. We therefore have a number of amendments. I personally believe that the scope of the directive goes beyond its objective. I do not think it is necessary for classic cars to be part of the directive. Nor do I think that motorcycles should be included, as the distinctive culture of recycling within the motorcycle industry obviates the need for a European directive in this area.
I am not looking for such rigidly high recycling quotas when it comes to special-purpose vehicles either. I want special-purpose vehicles such as ambulances to have high recovery quotas. This is my main concern in this matter.
In my opinion, the directive solidly regulates the matter of accountability for how a car is disposed of in Europe. This can be left as the Commission has proposed with the Member States ensuring the appropriate collection points for draining cars. This will involve, for example, disposing of more than 32 million lots of used oil, removing break fluid, etc.
An important part of this directive is the issue of what to do with used parts. What should we do with the shredded products? We should not overlook the fact that, although quotas are an important point in recycling and recovery, they are by no means the only point. Do not forget that, in the case of cars, 80% of environmental impact comes through driving, 1% through recovery and 19% through construction. Quotas are not, therefore, the only parameter in the matter of environmental compatibility, just one of many. Of course we need to aim high, but quotas must not become an end in themselves. We must understand that the bigger picture is important when it comes to the environmental impact of cars.
I am far keener to see us move away from today's car, weighing 1,400 kg and driving an average of 200,000 km, to a future car capable of driving the same distance but weighing just 1,000 kg. This would at least mean 400 kg times 200,000 km less transportation. This would represent real environmental progress because it would lead to a large reduction in CO2 which, if I have rightly understood the Kyoto Protocol, is the important factor. We therefore consider that, in future, vehicles which clearly and effectively use lightweight construction methods will produce less CO2 and should receive preferential treatment in their combustion quotas.
It should not be for each Member State, but for you and your staff, Commissioner, to decide whether these lightweight construction vehicles (and there is also talk of 3-litre vehicles) should receive preferential treatment. We think they should.
May I say something about costs. Some say that all the costs should be borne by the manufacturers; that this is only right and in the very best interests of the consumer. However, this can be seriously questioned as the manufacturers will pass on all the costs to consumers and acquire for themselves a state-sanctioned monopoly on recycling. I can only warn you against consenting to this. There are amendments which propose splitting the costs fifty-fifty between the manufacturer and the buyer of a new car. The money from this pool, system, or however you want to picture it, would mean that from 2006 all vehicles in circulation could be taken in without cost to the last holder. This too is a particular desire of my group.
Our proposal to split the costs has a crucial advantage, namely that we won't be an immediate candidate for the Court of Justice when the directive is adopted. The car industry is concerned about and half expecting repercussions, which is a serious problem which we must address accordingly. This is why I propose splitting the costs between the first holder and the manufacturer.
As for a ban on certain materials: of course we need one! A car has dangerous components which we must ban long-term. This means that we need a pressure instrument. The Commission has put forward various proposals which are too stringent and we have come up with some alternatives.
There are a number of sound amendments. This Parliament has been given more authority, so let us use it! Let us have the courage to put together a ground-breaking directive. A directive which we put together just for the sake of it would not be worthy of this House. I ask for your support.
Mr President, I almost feel like saying, "Phew" , now that we have at last come to the second reading on this directive which has given us so much work, and which has clearly also given a great deal of work to the rapporteur, Mr Florenz.
I do not consider this directive to be at all satisfactory since it does not answer the real question over what is going to be done with vehicles which have already been abandoned and which, today, can only be removed at local authority expense, i.e. the taxpayers' expense. The principle of 'polluter pays' is not being applied. Vehicles already abandoned have also been abandoned by Community legislation, in that they are not taken into consideration either in the texts on emissions or in this text on end-of-life vehicles.
The only merit of this directive is that it looks to the future. It has not, however, been possible to solve the problem of vehicles currently being used but which are already old and which cost far more to recycle. On the other hand, we can be fairly confident for the future because we know the efforts that car manufacturers are prepared to make in order to find (a) materials that are easier to recycle and (b) to set up recycling industries.
I should also like to stress the need to maintain a flexible approach to recycling, reuse and incineration, as far as the new particularly light materials are concerned which make it possible to reduce vehicle consumption and therefore emissions. This is a problem of compatibility between our directives on end-of-life vehicles and the former directives, including the one on auto-oil, which we voted on a few years ago.
We must therefore congratulate the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, on having the wisdom, in order to make things perfectly clear, to reintroduce the clause making an exception of the vintage cars which are part of our industrial and cultural heritage.
In conclusion, let me say that this directive is not ambitious enough to solve the problems of present car numbers and it is rather hypocritical with regard to the fate reserved for the wrecks which still clutter our forests, lakes and gardens. Once again, the principle of 'polluter pays' is not being applied. The taxpayer is still footing the bill.
Mr President, Commissioner, reading the leaflets which have been distributed in recent weeks, one would think that we were talking about the ultimate environmental catastrophe or the death of the car industry in Europe. Neither is correct. We simply must realise that the directive on the table is a sound directive. It means ecological progress for Europe, and we can be proud of ourselves if we succeed in enacting it and setting it in motion.
All the same, there is one point on which we are in conflict. In the grand scheme of the directive, it is perhaps a minor point, but nevertheless a disputed one. It concerns the issue of recycling costs. Here we find ourselves fundamentally at odds with last year's debate in the Council when freedom from costs for the last owner and the issue of financing were lumped together and a question mark placed over whether the last owner should really be free from costs. Last February in this House we unambiguously decided (and we Social Democrats are sticking to this) that the matter of freedom from costs for the last owner is not open to question!
So who will pay for the vehicles which are to be disposed of? For us this is straightforward: in the case of new vehicles it should be the manufacturer since this will also compel manufacturers to design and build recyclable cars. And what about vehicles which are already on the road? Let us look at an example. Rover in Great Britain, if they were responsible for all end-of-life cars, would actually be responsible for 5.8 million cars within the European Union and would immediately have to set aside EUR 250 million against recycling costs, whereas a manufacturer from Korea building similar cars would only have to shell out peanuts, as a representative of Deutsche Bank put it. Such distortions in competition are not about environmental protection; they simply affect investment potential and the jobs of those building cars in Europe. Consequently, for end-of-life vehicles we propose setting up a fund to cover the costs of recycling end-of-life vehicles in order to safeguard the principle of freedom from costs.
I can understand it when colleagues from countries which do not build cars advocate that manufacturers should pay the full whack and that they are not interested in the problem of distortions in competition when it comes to setting aside funds. However, I would ask these colleagues to show solidarity with the more than 2 million people who make a living from building cars in Europe, so that these jobs can be secured in the future. I am in favour of stringent environmental requirements, as you know from the auto-oil programme and the debate on exhaust emissions, but I believe that they should be the same for everyone!
Mr President, Commissioner, I think we need this directive. Firstly, because it clearly stipulates the environmental objectives. Secondly, because it can promote recycling, which is important. Thirdly, because it sets out a clear procedure to combat pollution caused by heavy metals. This is also an important point. The directive affords a European framework, also to Member States who already have systems in place and who wish to continue to use these.
So, first of all, we need to keep the recycling percentages at their present level. This will, of course, provide the necessary incentive for technological innovation and for identifying ways of dealing with materials that we do not as yet know how to dispose of.
Secondly, we need to retain the details as they are included in the common position. As from 2006, therefore, all vehicles should be handed in at no cost to their last owners. Needless to say, this is most definitely an essential point which should not be changed in any way.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 3 February 2000.
The Minutes of the sitting on Thursday 3 February have been distributed.
I can see from your reaction that many of the Members of Parliament have not received the Minutes and clearly you cannot approve Minutes which you have not seen. I therefore propose to submit the Minutes for your approval tomorrow morning, since obviously you do not have them and I must apologise for this.
Madam President, on a point of order. The BBC this morning reported that a British Member of this House, holding a senior position within his delegation, continues to offer strategic advice to private clients, but does not state in the Register of Interests who these clients are. The people of Europe have a right to expect their representatives to keep the public interest separate from private profit, but they can only be sure that this is being done in all cases if the information is both publicly available and easily accessible.
Madam President, since these matters are currently being considered by the Quaestors, may I ask you to use your influence both to ensure that the Register of Interests is brought up to date and modified to cover instances of this kind and, above all, to ensure that the Register is not only available for inspection by this House, but is also published on the Internet?
Thank you, Mr Davies. I shall look into this matter with the College of Quaestors.
Madam President, on a point of order. As this is the first Valentine' s Day of the new millennium I hope that you will agree with me that it would be fitting for this House to mark this day by making a firm commitment to tackling heart disease, the biggest killer in the European Union. I would urge Members to sign up to the commitment made today at the Winning Hearts Conference that every child born in the new millennium has the right to live until the age of at least 65 without suffering from avoidable cardiovascular disease. Happy Valentine' s Day!
Madam President, I rise under Rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure of this House and allude to the same point raised by Mr Davies about the very serious allegations made on BBC radio this morning. I would welcome an assurance from you that you will order an investigation to ensure that the two Members who were named in this particular BBC interview are not running their companies from this Parliament or from parliamentary offices, because that would be a very serious matter indeed. In the past the British Conservatives' double standards have brought the United Kingdom' s House of Commons into disrepute, and there is a very real danger that such behaviour would have a similar impact on this Parliament.
Thank you, Mr Murphy. As I informed Mr Davies, I promise to look into this matter this very evening with the quaestors.
Madam President, on a point of order. I have already written to you on a number of occasions concerning how points of order are raised in the House. I wonder on what point of order Mr Davies was speaking. Why did he not mention the fact that one of his own Liberal colleagues also has a consultancy that is under investigation by the BBC? Is this House going to let its agenda be determined by scurrilous reports on a programme which bases its news items on lies, or is it going to get down to serious work and address the challenges facing Europe?
Gentlemen, obviously the quaestors who look into this matter are not going to be basing their assessment just on information from radio programmes. They will look into the matter thoroughly.
Madam President, I believe I am expressing the feeling of a great number of Members of Parliament in most of the political groups when I say that the message which the President of the Commission sent to the new Austrian Chancellor a week ago created some unease. Was it in fact necessary in this message to specifically offer his best wishes for success, or to say, "I am sure that you will demonstrate the same commitment as shown by your predecessors to liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms" , or indeed that he awaited productive and constructive cooperation? This is why, Madam President, I should like to see Mr Prodi clarify tomorrow exactly what significance he meant to give these words, so that nobody, absolutely nobody, can use this message, which is unusual and unwise, to say the least, to contribute, and that includes counter to the intentions of Mr Prodi, towards making the dangerous political operation taking place in Austria a commonplace.
Thank you, Mr Wurtz. I would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, not to start a debate at this point. This was just a procedural motion. Let me remind you, Mr Wurtz, that we shall be seeing Mr Prodi tomorrow. He is going to make a statement on the Commission' s programme. Naturally you will be perfectly free to ask him questions in the speeches you make following this statement, just as Mr Prodi will be perfectly free to answer you. I suggest that you clarify this matter at that time, if you so wish and if Mr Prodi agrees.
Madam President, it is with great regret that I have to trouble you yet again with an issue that I have raised here twice before. I have already told you on a number of occasions that we, on behalf of the Dutch contingency, would like a Dutch television channel. There are now 28 channels here in this Parliament, including two Greek, one Portuguese, one Finnish and one Belgian, but still no Dutch, and as many as seven English, six German and six French. I was promised back in September that there would be a Dutch channel by January. It is now February and we are still waiting. I would ask you once again to work on this. I wonder what kind of mediaeval bureaucracy is at work here preventing a Dutch channel from being transmitted by satellite.
The Minutes of the sittings of Thursday 3 February and Monday 14 February have been distributed. The Minutes of 3 February were originally distributed in Brussels so perhaps this is why some Members did not receive them.
Madam President, my habit is always to be here for the opening of the part-session on Monday afternoons at 5.00 p.m. Yesterday it was impossible for myself and many MEPs to be here, because the 2.15 p.m. Air France flight, which normally brings us here, was cancelled, with no explanation from the airline, and we therefore arrived very late. If Air France insists on boycotting the European Parliament, we should take measures to prevent this occurring again.
Thank you, Mr Medina Ortega. I too wholeheartedly regret this situation. Would you be so kind as to write to me so that I have proof with which to tackle the competent authorities of both Air France and the French Government? This situation really cannot continue and we must therefore protest most strongly.
Madam President, I had the same experience as Mr Medina Ortega yesterday.
I feel that the French authorities - which have the honour of housing the European Parliament in Strasbourg - should be aware of their responsibility to ensure adequate connections with all the capitals of the Union.
Madam President, off the subject of aeroplane delays, I wish to apologise for the absence yesterday of my colleague in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, Caroline Lucas, who is a British Member. She could not be here because she was arrested yesterday morning during an anti-nuclear demonstration in Glasgow. Although her identity was noted and her position as a Member of the European Parliament was very apparent, she was still held in custody all day. I regard this as absolutely unacceptable and would ask you to contact the British authorities in order to ensure that this does not happen again and that Mrs Lucas receives an apology. I have written to you in this respect together with my colleague, Mrs Hautala.
Thank you, Mr Lannoye. I have received your letter and have already contacted the British Permanent Representative.
Madam President, I should like to make a request in connection with today' s vote which I started to make yesterday during the debate on the EQUAL report. I should like the vote on the Community EQUAL initiative to be postponed because we need a bit more time to negotiate an important point. I am optimistic and quite relaxed and confident about the vote; we shall gain broad support for this opinion on EQUAL. We just need a bit more time to work out the details on the asylum question and I would therefore request that the vote be postponed from this morning.
Madam President, to follow on from the point that Mr Lannoye made: Mrs Lucas was arrested just outside Glasgow for protesting against the Trident base at Faslane. I have a lot of sympathy with that protest. I have, however, no sympathy for Mrs Lucas trying to hide behind her Parliamentary immunity.
I have also been arrested for protesting at Faslane. I did not hide behind any immunity. I took the punishment that came to me. Mrs Lucas should do the same.
Madam President, I would like to comment on the request Mrs Stenzel has made to postpone the vote on the Community initiative EQUAL until tomorrow.
In fact, this initiative was the subject of a very lively debate in committee, and, given that it is a major Commission proposal, which refers to the agreements we reached last year, I consider it admissible.
We agree with Mrs Stenzel that the request to postpone the vote is admissible in the interests of achieving the greatest possible agreement between the groups, so that Parliament can express its position on this initiative with the broadest majority possible.
Does anyone want to speak against Mrs Stenzel' s request, as supported by Mrs Ghilardotti?
Mr President, I see in the Minutes that two Members spoke yesterday about delayed flights to Strasbourg on Monday. I would like to add that the flight from Amsterdam' s Schipol airport was also delayed and then cancelled. We were diverted to Basel-Mulhouse Airport. We were told that a bus would meet us there on arrival. In fact, it took 45 minutes after we arrived before the bus appeared at the airport. We finally got here, on Monday at 8.30 p.m., after some of us had spent more than 12 hours travelling.
This sort of service and difficulty in getting to Strasbourg on a Monday is quite hopeless. If the French Government insists that we continue to meet in Strasbourg, it could at least ensure, where flights are diverted to Basle, that buses arrive on time to meet the diverted passengers, otherwise it is quite pointless for us to try to arrive here on Monday and attend to any kind of business. I wonder if that could be added to the Minutes.
Mr President, I was booked on the same flight and I am rather embarrassed to admit that the airline was KLM, our national airline company. I hope that next time, also if any other airline company is involved, things will run more smoothly.
Mr President, I would just like to draw your attention to something that concerns today' s agenda. We decided on Monday that the Council' s statement on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Geneva Convention was to be postponed. I would just like to clarify that we will only be talking about the other items on this agenda today, and not about the Geneva Convention. This item has been postponed until the next part-session in March. It was erroneously included in today' s agenda.
Mr Swoboda, I can confirm what you have just said and there is, in fact, a printing error. The document that has been distributed contains inaccuracies, because the decision has been taken to postpone the debate.
Mr President, I just want to say that, as I was walking in this morning, I noticed two people smoking outside the Hemicycle. The smell is absolutely disgusting! Can you please do something about it?
I cannot do anything about it myself, but you are quite right. We need a quick way of educating people, including those who do not obey the rules decided upon in this House.
Regarding the problems caused by air travel delays, perhaps everybody who has had difficulty reaching Strasbourg for the present part-session should form a small group - although I am not sure that it will be small - to discuss the precise nature of the problems encountered.
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the coherence of EU policies with development.
Mr President, it is a great pleasure for me to address you for the first time on behalf of the Council presidency, particularly in view of the very important role that the European Parliament is bound to play in the near future, given the need to strengthen development policies at European Union level. The subject of the statement that I have the honour of presenting to you today, is the coherence of different Union policies with development policy.
I shall, of course, give the Commission an opportunity to add to some of the observations that I shall be making. I would like to start by emphasising the need we all feel, at EU level, to reconcile the extraordinary development and progress that we have seen in many areas of life - not least because of the marked technological impetus over recent years, which has benefited people in all walks of life, throughout the world, in terms of well-being and improvements in living conditions - with the fact that, at the same time, there has been a substantial increase in the pronounced imbalances between some regions and geopolitical areas of the world. This endangers the stability of the international system and jeopardises peace. We are all therefore duty-bound to seek to match our policies better to this objective of achieving greater stability and greater balance in the various parts of our planet.
The consequence of all this is a reassessment of development policies in response to the globalisation of economic and financial markets. A serious imbalance in the functioning of these markets has emerged, which has of course made it necessary to make important adjustments, which in turn inevitably mean new options as regards development policies. We will therefore find ourselves on the threshold of a new model for development policies which - and I would like to stress this - will require action on our part in four essential areas:
Firstly, there will be a need for more concerted action between all international players, by which I mean donors, requiring greater coordination, greater coherence and improved links between humanitarian aid and development policies; it will also require strengthening of the multilateral system and greater attention being paid to indebtedness and to financing and development problems. At the same time, however, there will have to be some changes in the framework within which those countries now receiving aid operate, particularly the need to fight corruption and to maintain democracy and good governance as fundamental principles in developing their political systems, together with a need to focus special attention on these countries' own policies for reducing poverty.
The second aspect of this new model for development policies relates to the need for a more integrated approach to development. This means not just an approach limited to development aid as the sole element of this policy, but a policy that also increasingly takes account of the role of other policies in the spheres of finance, trade and investment. Furthermore, this new model must respect the need for this integrated vision of development to be approached both from a global policy angle and also in the light of the various donor countries' own policies.
A third aspect of this new model that I would like to emphasise is a policy aimed at achieving our objectives. Since 1995, following a concerted international effort between the main donor states, involving in particular a reflection paper produced by the OECD' s Development Assistance Committee, it has been possible to establish some important objectives by way of guidelines for development policies, both at national and international level. As you will know, the aim of these objectives is to cut poverty by 50% by 2015, by increasing compulsory schooling, by significantly reducing child mortality rates, and by implementing a raft of social welfare measures with a view to effectively achieving this objective. This would mean moving away from the situation of extreme poverty in which more than a third of the world' s population lives, and moving away from the extremely poor living conditions suffered by over a billion people. This is an extraordinary state of affairs, which certainly means that if this objective is to be achieved the international community as a whole will have to participate and intervene actively.
And that brings me to the fourth aspect of this new development model that I would like to emphasise. Particularly in recent years, development policies have been regarded as an increasingly global matter, and yet there is apparently a lack of strong international leadership. The concerted actions of the United Nations institutions have played an important role here, as has the Bretton Woods system. I have in mind, in particular, the important impetus given to this debate by the World Bank, especially through its Comprehensive Framework document, and by the International Monetary Fund, where, for the first time, an institution of this kind has put the problem of reducing poverty at the centre of its policy guidelines and has forged a hitherto unimaginable link, for a body of this type, between debt relief and poverty. This new role for international organisations on development issues is also a good reason for us to consider the role of the European Union in this context.
The Portuguese Presidency has highlighted the need for the European Union to combine its highly important international role as the main donor with a leading role - and a more active one - in this movement to reform international development policies, and to create greater scope for coordination, in particular with the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods system.
Mr President, I should like make a comment in connection with a meeting held last night by various Members of Parliament from all groups. The purpose of the meeting, which was attended by several Vice-Presidents and Quaestors, together with the architects who designed this building, was to discuss how we could improve our working conditions.
We discovered during the meeting that the lovely white curtain behind you, Mr President, in fact conceals a huge window which, if the curtain were drawn back, would afford a wonderful view over the river. We were told that the curtain was closed so that you would not have your back to the light and to improve the lighting during debates. But what is to prevent us, before the sitting is opened or when you close the sitting, opening the curtains and enjoying the apparently magnificent view behind you?
I am more than happy for our House to be illuminated by the brilliance of our debates but a little real sunlight on our bubble of democracy from time to time would not come amiss. I think it would be a nice idea if you could discuss opening this curtain from time to time with the ushers.
Thank you very much Mr Onesta, I am grateful for any suggestions that will make our Chamber more conducive to human comfort. I would propose that we carry on in the normal way for the time being. In the meantime, I will have someone check as to whether it would be a simple matter, technically speaking. If so, then we will have a trial run for half an hour and see how it looks when the President sits with his back to the light!
The next item is the report (A5-0025/2000) by Mr Olle Schmidt on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on:
I. Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 85/611/EEC on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities (UCITS) with a view to regulating management companies and simplified prospectuses (COM(1998) 451 - C4-0465/1998 - 1998/0242(COD));
II. Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 85/611/EEC on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities (UCITS) (COM(1998) 449 - C4-0464/1998 - 1998/0243(COD)).
. (SV) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is my hope that Parliament is prepared now to make a decision to extend and strengthen the financial market in Europe. As a new Member of the European Parliament, it has been very interesting and instructive for me to be given responsibility for this important matter. I should especially like to thank my colleagues on the committee for their willingness to find compromises; the President and the Bureau for lending a sensitive ear to this complex issue; the Commission, and especially the Commissioner, for being such worthwhile contacts; the Council; and also the division responsible for servicing the committee, for its selfless work. There was a good deal of agreement within the committee, apart from on a matter which, too, I hope it will be possible to solve.
The issue of UCITS may appear difficult, technical and a political minefield. I believe that some people do not even know what UCITS stands for. Allow me, however, to state very clearly that this is a question which really does affect the citizens of Europe in so far as it relates to how their savings are administered, what options there are available, how competition operates between countries in regard to different forms of savings, savers' demand for security, and the opportunities Europe' s citizens have to save wisely for their old age. It is a question of weighing demands for liberalisation in the interests of a better market and higher yield against investors' need for protection and security.
In the course of the 1980s, most markets in Europe underwent drastic deregulation. As a result, the national money and bond markets in particular developed very quickly over a period of a few years. Collective investment undertakings became an alternative to saving with a bank. In my own country, more than 60 per cent of Swedes save with a variety of funds. The security afforded by this type of saving is attributable to the broad range of investment vehicles in which the funds are placed. The capital and securities market has continued to be developed. The current Directive on UCITS has become antiquated and outdated. New types of funds have been introduced in the various Member States which are not permitted to market their units in other Member States. Obviously, this inhibits competition and innovation and restricts the public' s range of savings options.
The Commission' s proposal with which we are dealing today is in two parts. The first concerns the product, that is to say the funds. The other concerns the collective investment undertakings. The main purpose of the first proposal is to extend the investment opportunities of collective investment undertakings by allowing them to invest in units in other collective investment undertakings, for example units in funds, standardised options and futures contracts and deposits in credit institutions and in certain types of money market instruments. Special risk-spreading rules are proposed in respect of such investments, involving both quantitative and qualitative criteria. In addition, the Commission' s proposal puts forward special risk-spreading rules for funds whose aim is to replicate a particular stock index, a so-called index fund. The committee wishes to make the requirements in relation to the Commission' s proposal more stringent.
To guarantee transparency and prudence, investments in non-harmonised funds should only be allowed on condition that qualitative criteria, for example a transparency requirement and investor protection, are introduced. In addition, quantitative criteria (risk exposure) should be introduced.
Moving on now, then, to the point where there is (or, I hope, was) a lack of agreement, namely OTC derivatives. The Commission' s proposal makes a distinction between derivatives dealt in on regulated markets and derivative instruments not dealt in on regulated markets (so-called OTC derivatives). The Commission' s proposal takes it as read that OTC derivatives are not one of the general types of investment that UCITS deal in, but that they should only be used to achieve efficient portfolio management and to hedge exchange-rate risks. In recent years, the derivatives market has grown very rapidly in almost all the Member States. It is therefore important that regulation of derivatives is flexible so that the market is not tied down ahead of future developments. The definitions 'standardised futures contracts' and 'standardised options' should therefore be combined to form a new definition, 'financial derivative instruments' , which also covers OTC derivatives. Investment in OTC derivatives, however, should only be allowed on condition that both quantitative and qualitative criteria are introduced. They are very important in this case. They must be introduced to guarantee the protection of investors.
The Commission' s second proposal focuses on the bodies which manage UCITS, that is to say management companies. The rules for management companies, for example the conditions for starting up and conducting business, are brought into line with the existing rules and regulations. A crucial point is that rules are proposed for so-called simplified prospectuses. Relevant information must be given to prospective unit-holders in a fund in a language which is readily understandable to investors in the host country. In this regard, too, the committee is prepared to go further than the Commission.
A question which has also been discussed in the committee is that of the capital contribution to be required from management companies. There are different views on this. One of the most important things, for me, personally, is that the common regulations should not cause smaller companies to go under.
During the months that I have been working on this report, one very clear demand has emerged, both from industry and from those who represent the consumer. The current situation is not good. Both savers and the industry need modernised regulations for the whole of Europe. I believe that today' s proposal strikes a good balance between liberalisation of the market and the desire for effective protection for investors.
I just want to conclude by saying that a number of Members of Parliament think that the present proposal goes too far, while others think that I am not sufficiently liberal. To them I just want to say, as the English expression goes, 'You can' t have it all.'
. Mr President, at the outset I wish to place on the official record of the House my thanks for the tremendous work undertaken by Mr Schmidt, our rapporteur. I was in fact the surrogate father of these reports during the previous Parliament. We failed over the last six years to get any compromise or agreement with regard to this matter. In a short space of time Mr Schmidt has managed to bring it forward to this final stage within Parliament. I thank him for that.
As the draftsperson for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, I also wish to place on record my thanks to the secretariat of both the Legal Affairs Committee and the Economic Affairs Committee for their cooperation on this matter.
Mr President, yesterday' s Minutes will naturally indicate interventions referring to the so-called 'Strasbourg Declaration" which intends to implicate the European Parliament in certain considerations which would literally lead to the conclusion that I am a Nazi. This declaration - which, as I have said, implicates the European Parliament, although no such declaration was put before this Parliament - is a completely unacceptable form of manipulation. I thank the President, Mrs Fontaine, who just yesterday expressed her opinion by refuting the implication of this House. Mr President, as well as discrediting the PNV, Eusko Alkartasuna and the democratic government of the Basque Country - who have the kind of attitude which, in the case of Ireland, deserved the Nobel prize - by calling them Nazis, the declaration insults representatives of the European citizens - as in my case: I represent a section of Galician society - by saying that we are more dangerous than the Nazis, and insults groups which are clearly democratic, with decades of history, in an unacceptable and crazy way, which I would like to condemn here and now. I would like these words to be heard, because the European Parliament cannot be implicated in this way in a crazy declaration which I consider to be totally unacceptable.
Thank you, Mr Nogueira, for your explanation. I would remind you that questions on the Minutes should refer to the Minutes. In any event, for those Members who not aware of the President' s position, I will read the official communication and it will thereby appear in today' s Minutes:
"On 17 February, Mrs Nicole Fontaine, President of the European Parliament, received as guests, at their request, the representatives of the Forum d' Ermua. The Spanish Vice-Presidents of the European Parliament were represented. Following this interview, the representatives of this Forum presented her with a text entitled "Strasbourg Declaration" . The President wishes to specify that under no circumstances does she sanction the terms of this "declaration" .
I therefore believe that the issue is totally cleared up.
Mr President, I would like to request a correction to the Minutes regarding the vote on Amendment No 5 of the Swoboda report. Please note that Mr Michel Raymond, Mr Jean Saint-Josse and I voted against this amendment.
We take note and this will appear in the Minutes.
Mr President, this is not exactly a point of order but concerns a communication we have before us today, namely that the Conference of Presidents open to Members, which was scheduled for 23 February, has now been cancelled. We should consider on principle whether there is any point at all in holding these kinds of meetings. I have the feeling they are just another compulsory exercise we have to perform. We can just as easily find out what happened from the newspapers. That would be more productive and I do not like seeing the various committee agendas that are already overloaded being cut again and again because of this kind of show-piece. So I think we should consider simply abolishing these meetings once and for all.
Mr Bsch, I take note of your observation but, clearly, we hold this type of Conference of Presidents, open to all MEPs at the original request of the MEPs, so that they may participate in some of them. Surely we should be more selective. In any event, the Bureau will consider your suggestion.
Mr President, we should like to request that the last sentence of Amendment No 2 which reads: 'also calls on the Member States to promote tourism for the elderly' be incorporated into Paragraph 25, which deals specifically with social tourism, after: 'tourism for organised social groups...'. We think its inclusion there would be both more appropriate and more effective.
In accordance with our Rules of Procedure, 12 MEPs may oppose.
(More than 12 MEPs opposed the tabling of the oral amendment) The oral amendment will not be tabled.
Mr President, I abstained on the excellent report by Mr Viceconte even though it contains some excellent ideas and Bavaria, which I represent here, is one of the most attractive tourist regions in the European Union. I warmly invite you to spend holidays in Bavaria and neighbouring Austria as often as you can.
But apart from that I wanted to say that I do not like the centralist approach adopted in the Commission' s communication. I believe we need more decentralisation, more regionalism and less bureaucratic and centralist decision-making, especially in tourism policy. That is why we should not get drawn into a centralist EU tourism policy.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 18 February 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on 22 February, ETA struck again in a brutal attack in Spain with the murder of Fernando Buesa Blanco, the General Secretary of the Socialist Party of Vizcaya and the spokesman of the Socialist Party of the Basque Parliament, and Jorge Dez Elorza, his bodyguard. The same day, I conveyed my own and the European Parliament' s deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the victims' families.
These men paid with their lives for their commitment to democracy. I utterly condemn this act of barbarism that is unworthy of any civilised society. The rule of law and the respect of rights and fundamental freedoms are the principles on which the European Union is based. Terrorism, whatever form it takes, is unacceptable. In expressing the hope that these men will be the last victims of ETA, I call on this organisation finally to cease resorting to violence and to use the democratic channels that exist in Spain.
I would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to observe one minute' s silence in memory of Fernando Buesa Blanco and Jorge Dez Elorza.
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I want to thank you for your statement last Tuesday and for your words today in memory of Fernando Buesa Blanco. He was a member of the Basque regional parliament, spokesman for the Socialist Party in that parliament and also a former vice-president of the Basque regional government.
Madam President, the best tribute that my Group and this House can pay to Fernando Buesa is to take on board his vision, as a European, of the Basque Country, Spain and Europe. The following is a translated extract from his autobiography. 'We are in Europe. Anyone of my age - I am 54 - can remember their grandparents' era and their parents' era and, of course, is living in the current era. We can also see into the era in which our children will live. In my grandparents' time, it took several days to travel from Vitoria to Seville. Now you can go from Vitoria to Copenhagen in 2 or 3 hours by plane. Today, at the end of the 20th century, a single market is operating in Europe in which we will soon be using a single currency. We can now travel much more easily than our grandparents could within Spain or even within the Basque Country.
We are building a vast European area which will firstly be linked economically and then politically. This process may take a long time but it is unstoppable and, what is more, desirable. The public still regard this as being a long way off but it is very real and should serve to make us question certain aspects of our current situation.
In a debate within the Socialist Party on the Irish process, someone said: "In the end, the key to the Irish solution was that everyone involved had the following thought: does it really matter whether we are Irish or British? Everyone can be what they want to be because, if Ireland and Britain are both in the European Union, there is no point in killing each other for being Irish or British. What difference does it make if the national level is no longer going to function?"
We in the Basque Country could ask ourselves the same question. Does it really matter if we are Basque or Spanish or European? We have talked a lot about what it is to be Basque, but a Basque today dresses like a Dane and reads the same things as a British person. If life is going to be lived on a much more global basis, as is already happening, and our children will therefore be living in the Europe which we are creating, why are we killing each other for being Basque or Spanish?'
Fernando Buesa also said the following, which everyone in Ireland has probably thought. 'If we are killing each other for no reason - and this was happening in Ireland because there were paramilitary groups on all sides - we should be resolutely asking ourselves this question in the Basque Country too. What difference does it make to be Basque? Surely it is all the same thing. You can be what you want to be. If, in the future, economics and politics and vital decisions for each country are dealt with in the European arena, there is no point killing or dying for being Basque or Spanish' .
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, I want to express our most profound feeling of solidarity with the families of Fernando Buesa, an elected representative of the Basque people, and Jorge Dez, a member of the Basque police force. We also naturally want to express our solidarity with the whole of the Basque Socialist Party.
In recent times, in this House, we have sadly had to discuss the various faces of extremism in Europe. It does not matter what banner these come under because, in the end, they are all different expressions of the same thing. Faced with these, we democrats cannot resign ourselves to the peace of the dead. On the contrary, we must take strength from knowing that the only social division which exists in the Basque Country is the abyss which separates those who kill, and those who support and express understanding for the latter, from the vast majority of the Basque people who simply want to live in peace and freedom.
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I must indicate my complete and categorical condemnation of the terrorist attack on 22 February in Vitoria which took the lives of the socialist MP and spokesman in the Basque parliament, Fernando Buesa, and his bodyguard, Jorge Dez.
In a country governed by the rule of law and which is a member of the European Union, it should be possible for all ideas and options to be defended, provided that this occurs democratically and with respect for the rights of the individual and the principles and values of justice, freedom and economic and social progress on which the Union is based. The transgression of these principles is simply not acceptable, as clearly indicated in the Treaties.
There is no justification in our society for terrorist acts such as the one which took the lives of Fernando Buesa and Jorge Dez, particularly when the former was a freely elected representative of the Basque people.
We pray that these are the last victims in a process which, as you said, Madam President, has seen much barbarism. We pray that a way forward can be found which will allow the Basque people to live together in peace.
Madam President, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, I must add my voice to those of my colleagues who have expressed their grief at the truly perverse and cruel outrage which has occurred in the Basque Country. We send our condolences to the families of the victims and emphatically condemn these acts which have been going on for so long and which must stop.
The terrorist organisation ETA has, in its time, killed police officers and soldiers. It has placed a bomb in a supermarket and killed men, women and children. In the streets of Madrid it has killed a general, Quintana Lacaci, who defended democracy at the time of the attempted coup of 1981. It has assassinated the spokesman of the Popular Party in the town council of San Sebastin, Gregorio Ordez. It has been to the lecture room of the university professor in Constitutional Law, Francisco Toms y Valiente, and killed him in cold blood. Now, just a few days ago, in the same odious way in which it assassinated Admiral Blanco, it has killed the socialist MP and spokesman in the Vitoria parliament, Fernando Buesa, and his bodyguard, Jorge Dez, of the Basque police force.
ETA must be condemned. However, those who support and express understanding for these attacks must also be condemned. There is no point continuing to ask these people and organisations to go down the democratic road. We must appeal to the whole of society and particularly to the democratic parties, whether they are national or nationalist, and no matter how pro- or anti-European they are. It is regrettable that there are organisations and people who are saying nothing or simply regretting the deaths as if they were the result of a road traffic accident.
The next item is the oral question (B5-0011/2000) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, to the Commission, on the shipwreck of the Erika.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I want to warmly thank Mr Fischler for being here today. Our President told us yesterday that the Commissioner would be unable to attend today due to prior commitments. He must have reconsidered and, in so doing, has, as usual, shown great respect for this House. I thank him for this.
On behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I must highlight our concerns about the shipwreck of the tanker Erika. There are two political reasons why our committee and myself as its chairman must speak out about this issue. Firstly, we must show the Commission, the Council and the Member States that this House cannot and will not forget about this serious incident. Secondly, we must focus today on one specific aspect of this terrible environmental disaster, namely its effect on the fisheries and aquaculture sectors in the affected regions.
The epilogue to this disaster must surely be the urgent adoption of measures to minimise the damage and to prevent this happening again in the future. Enough regrets and thoughts have been expressed about this event. We must now get down to adopting measures, Commissioner. Firstly, efficient controls are needed in Community waters and ports in order to ensure safety in maritime transport, particularly where oil and dangerous goods are involved.
The construction of these vessels, the use of double hulls, their age, their control by classification companies, insurance, the creation of databases containing all relevant information, Community cooperation and coordination, the reinforcement of control by inspectors and the liability of carriers and owners of cargoes are all issues which must be tackled. Who better than the European Commission to make serious proposals for European harmonisation in these areas?
Flags of convenience must also be specifically monitored and regulated in maritime transport, particularly as they do so much damage to the fisheries which we have taken to calling 'responsible fisheries' . Access into Community waters of vessels flying flags of convenience which do not meet Community safety standards must be controlled.
We expect concrete action from the European Commission. The fisheries and aquaculture sectors in the affected areas of Brittany and the Vende are particularly important, well-developed and prestigious. The European Commission must therefore publicise the damage caused and its assessment of this damage. It must also indicate all the specific measures, including political, economic, social and financial measures, which it intends to adopt in order to minimise the damage and compensate the fishermen and industries which have been dramatically affected overnight.
How can consumer confidence in products from this area be regained? How can those affected be compensated? This is a very serious problem which the European Union, as an economic, commercial, industrial and fishing power, must tackle.
We must get to work and lead the way in these issues which are damaging our environment and destroying industries and occupations. We must adopt preventative measures which can stop disasters like this from happening in the future. This is the essence of my oral question on behalf of all the members of the Committee on Fisheries. We hope to hear specific proposals from the Commission, with plenty of action and no more regrets. This House will today approve a very important and appropriate joint motion for a resolution tabled by several groups.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, firstly, Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, I would like to stress that when Parliament calls, naturally I will make myself available, and I believe I have demonstrated this to your satisfaction in the past. As far as the contamination of the west coast of France is concerned, which came about following the sinking of the Erika, we know what extensive and terrible damage this disaster has caused, and that this was further exacerbated by the fact that the disaster coincided with a major storm off the west coast of France. The combined effect of the oil spillage and the storm caused massive contamination, with the oyster banks and mussel culture being hardest hit and completely obliterated in parts.
In addition, the fisheries sector has suffered various kinds of damage, particularly to nets. Consequently, fishing activities had to be suspended in some zones on account of this oil pestilence. We are working in very close cooperation with the French authorities on this and the competent Commissioner is already in the process of examining the whole package of measures for improving safety at sea and, if necessary, will present proposals to the Commission accordingly, so as to preclude any such incidents from happening in future. The Community must show solidarity with the victims and we must use every available opportunity - I am completely with Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on this - to provide assistance.
The primary instrument available to the fisheries and aquaculture sectors for such eventualities - and I can only speak for these sectors here - is the financial instrument for the alignment of fisheries. The funds can be employed under the terms of the French fisheries-structural programme for 2000-2006, and the French authorities have informed us that they intend to send their programme to Brussels next week. EUR 225 million will be available to France for structural measures up until the year 2006.
Working within this range of options, how can we help the fishermen on the one hand, and the mussel and oyster farmers on the other? It is possible that fishermen and ship-owners will receive compensation for the damages incurred on account of the temporary suspension of their activities, with up to 50% being financed by the state. The Community is prepared to co-finance 50% of this. France has the exclusive right to determine the level of compensation, and a total of EUR 9 million are available to this end.
So how can we help the oyster and mussel farmers? The funds could be used for cleaning the oyster vats. New equipment could be procured for the oyster vats, or damaged aquaculture equipment could be repaired. The effluent from aquaculture installations could be treated and, in addition, regulations for improving and monitoring the quality of follow-up and hygiene could be financed. Another idea worth considering, among others, would be a general sales promotion campaign.
If France submits its claims to us before the end of this month, then it will be possible to backdate the compensation to 1.1.2000. At all events, we are prepared, for the Commission' s part, to examine the claim as soon as we receive it, and we will also approve it quickly, so as to be able to get the aid for the victims off the ground with immediate effect.
Mr President, I am encouraged by what you have just said, Mr Fischler. The disaster off the coast of Brittany is truly enormous in scale. The accident involving the oil tanker Erika has had such a huge economic and ecological impact that this is the second time we have dealt with this issue in the space of a few weeks, and rightly so. A whole branch of industry, fisheries and aquaculture and the jobs they generate, hangs in the balance. We cannot, and must not, stand idly by in the face of this. Fine speeches and bitter tears are not much use. We could talk for two, eight, or sixteen hours, but it would not bring fish back to life or put food in a Breton fisherman' s stomach. There is certainly more to solidarity than making speeches. That is why our motion for a resolution can only be a first step, and deeds, i.e. measures, must then follow which will at last serve to ensure that never again will there be a disaster of this kind, particularly off the coast of Europe.
We demand recognition of the polluter pays principle in this motion, which has the overall support of the groups. We also demand red tape-free aid for the fishermen and aquaculture operators whose livelihoods are under threat. However, this must not become a competition-distorting, long-term subsidy. We also demand improved safety conditions for sea traffic and we want there to be better monitoring overall.
As we have heard, the Commission is getting stuck in. A meeting with representatives of industry is to make the Commission' s proposals known. The need for more stringent Port State Control will not be the only subject of discussion on this occasion, as the pressing need to deploy double-hulled tankers in the future will also be on the agenda. I welcome this with open arms. My demands go further, however. The Erika is the straw that broke the camel' s back. In the interests of the safety and protection, through preventative measures, of European coastal areas, and of the continued existence of the fisheries sector as an established economic factor, we need a European environmental coastguard and a maritime data network affording effective cooperation between the Member States, which is what we were appealing for yesterday. This is the challenge Europe faces. Europe' s credibility is at stake. We cannot afford to have another disaster where all we do is make a few speeches!
Mr President, the shipwreck of the Erika off the coast of Brittany on 12 December caused an oil slick whose effects on the environment will be felt for years. In addition to destroying natural resources, this accident has had a serious impact on certain economic sectors, particularly those dependent on fisheries. With 20 000 tonnes of crude oil left in the holds of the sunken vessel, the situation could still deteriorate.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 2 March 2000.
Madam President, this is actually about an event which has taken place since the last sitting, a hearing held by the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities. There was a grave danger of this House's reputation being damaged. You see, it emerged that during the plenary part-sessions there is a significant rise in prostitution in the area, in Strasbourg. I would cordially request that you look into this matter with the Strasbourg authorities and investigate whether criminal activity is at work here, and whether it is linked to trafficking in women and forced prostitution.
I think that we need, as a matter of urgency, to send out a clear message to public opinion that we are doing something about this and I believe that the European Parliament cannot be indifferent to what is reported in public about what goes on on the fringes of plenary part-sessions.
Thank you, Mrs Grner. I would like to say that I was, like yourself, extremely shocked to hear this and immediately wrote to the Mayor of Strasbourg in order to get to the bottom of this issue. I fully agree with your remarks and have even been proactive in responding to your wishes. I will, of course, keep you updated on the reply that Mr Ries is bound to send me.
We get bad news in these points of order very often, but I have very good news for our Dutch colleagues. They now have two television channels.
(Applause and laughter) The Quaestors are working hard on their behalf and we are waiting for the Finnish television channel. We have two German channels as well, so happy viewing everybody. I hope you enjoy it.
I am absolutely delighted, Mrs Banotti, and think that the Members concerned should thank our Quaestors wholeheartedly.
Madam President, I would simply like to add to what Mrs Grner has said. We have indeed learned that during the plenary sessions in Brussels and Strasbourg - Strasbourg is not the only place this happens - there was a massive influx of prostitutes, and in particular young women from Eastern Europe. You will be aware that terrible things happen to these women, that they are tortured and their families threatened. It is not only in Strasbourg that this happens. I believe that we should all sit down and discuss this, that this Parliament should denounce this state of affairs and above all that it should play a full part in eradicating such modern-day slavery.
Thank you, Mrs Roure, for this additional information. We will assess the situation when in Brussels too, and then see what should be done.
Madam President, on behalf of the entire Dutch contingent, I would like to extend warm thanks to Mrs Banotti for all the efforts she has made to ensure that we now have two Dutch television channels.
Madam President, I would like to talk about a quite different matter, which concerns Iran. There has been a dialogue between the various political groups, both at the Conference of Presidents and elsewhere, and would like, during the plenary part-session, to urge you to write to the President of the Republic of Iran, Mr Khatami, regarding the fate of five students who were arrested in July 1999 and who are still in prison, one of whom has been sentenced to death.
I feel that it would be an appropriate gesture on your part, as the President of this Parliament, to appeal to President Khatami to, at the very least, suspend the death sentence passed on this Iranian student.
Thank you, Mr Jonckheer. I will happily comply with your request.
Madam President, I do not think that Mrs Banotti should be cock-a-hoop today because she has laid on two Dutch TV channels. It would have been better if she had obtained channels in all languages. I hope we shall be getting a Danish channel next time.
Thank you, Mr Blak. As you can see, Mrs Banotti, you still have your work cut out for you.
Madam President, I have learnt a new code of conduct here in the European Parliament, where one always has to express one' s thanks. I too would like to say thank you for the fact that here we can watch a Finnish television channel. I would like to say thank you for the fact that there was sound the last time I tried it, and I would like to say thank you for the fact that today too there is sound, but back home we also have a picture. I hope that we will also be getting a picture on the Finnish language television channel and not just the sound. Then I would like to say thank you for the fact that we have got cold water in the taps. Back home we also have hot water, but at least it is good to have some water.
I declare resumed the 2000-2001 session of the European Parliament.
Mr President, the second item on this morning' s agenda is the recommendation for second reading on cocoa and chocolate products, for which I am the rapporteur. Quite by accident I learnt yesterday, at 8.30 p.m., that the vote was to take place at noon today. It was however initially scheduled, I thought, for noon tomorrow. I have therefore been caught completely off guard by this, and have not even had the chance to draw up the lists of votes and to see whether there are any roll-calls or not.
You know as well as I do that this matter is quite controversial and well reported in the media. I have been a Member of this Parliament for ten years and I have always been given notice, in my capacity as rapporteur, of any changes to the order of voting. I should prefer for this vote to be held tomorrow. It would suit me, personally, and I do not think anyone would have any objection, since it is a relatively brief vote.
Mr President, we do not have anything against postponing the vote. However, I insist on the other scheduled votes, particularly those on the Lisbon Summit, going ahead tomorrow. We have nothing against postponement, with this proviso.
The competent services have informed me that tomorrow' s list of subjects will be rather lengthy.
Mr President, like Mr Lannoye, late last night I too was faced with the fact that the vote on my report at second reading is planned for 12.00 p.m. The groups have emphatically asked me to urge you not to let the vote take place at 12.00 p.m. but tomorrow instead, as they have not had the chance to apply for split and roll-call votes. After all, it came as a complete surprise that the vote was planned for 12.00 p.m. I would therefore ask, also on behalf of many others, to postpone the vote until tomorrow.
Mr Blokland, the officials of the competent services have informed me that your report will automatically be put to the vote tomorrow. I now ask the House whether it agrees to postpone the vote on the Lannoye report until tomorrow. If we are all in agreement, that is what the arrangement will be.
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the European Commission' s annual legislative programme for the year 2000.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the year 2000 must and will be a decisive year for Europe. In our debate on the five-year plan, we established that this year would mark the dawn of the "decade of Europe" , and it will therefore be a decisive year for the Commission. The explanation of the five-year plan provided us with the general reference framework and we have already set out the Commission' s Work Programme for the five-year term. In fact, within the space of the month which has passed since that debate, we have already started to take practical steps and have set off along the long road to enlargement to include the various applicant countries. This is a huge, wide-reaching, extremely important operation, and I would like to stress to the House that the Commission has put a great deal of work into it. There has been acknowledgement of my strong commitment to enlargement from various quarters, but the Commission' s commitment to allaying the fears of public opinion regarding this project has also been recognised. I would like to stress before the House that this is a solemn, important undertaking, which is not intended to put back enlargement, but to make enlargement possible in genuine, realistic, tangible terms. If we do not do this, we will reach a point where enlargement is no longer possible, whereas it is the current Commission' s main task for its five-year term of office.
We have started to implement the five-year plan with regard to the other two points to which we had committed ourselves as well: the modernisation of the Commission and preparation for the Intergovernmental Conference. Today, we are taking a different, more analytical approach to the debate, and the criticisms which were levelled at me during the last debate, which was only a general debate, were justified, as the five-year plan was too general. Today, you have before you an analytical, very comprehensive document, which is how the five-year plan should be. It is a specific plan of action, an extremely detailed document, which indicates the competent service, procedures, date of adoption, type of instrument and type of paper for each of the Commission' s initiatives, and the legal basis proposed for it. It outlines all the stages necessary for these decisions to become reality. Of course, and I am not saying this because I am here, in the presence of Parliament, but because it seems particularly important, we have placed particular emphasis on Parliament' s responsibilities in the codecision procedure. We have published the whole of this plan on the Internet, not to follow the trend - which is not a trend, but a major cultural development - but in order to make the plan available to all the citizens, so that they are able to hold it in their hands and use it as reference. Nowadays, there are no secret or private plans. This is a plan which can be used as a benchmark.
Let us now look at the major points of this plan. The underlying intention is to provide answers to the specific problems of the citizens. This is an annual programme, and it therefore needs to be detailed. We have touched on all the major points, including the environment, health, energy, transport and consumer protection, in addition to the major issue of justice.
Let us ponder this last point for a moment. Basically, the European citizens want justice in order to be able to live their daily lives in safety. I took this into consideration when I was talking about enlargement, because it is really very important for us to be aware of the overall picture. The Commission will put forward practical security proposals for increased coordination between Europe' s police forces and for a common action to fight crime, because we have major problems to deal with, including some new ones. There are fresh racial tensions, minority issues and basic problems of peaceful coexistence, and we must safeguard this coexistence, protect and regulate it. Therefore, this year, we are going to develop efficient measures governing emigration and the right to asylum. We will present tangible proposals on these matters during the course of this year. The line we are taking is very clear. We must combine openness, tolerance and hospitality with security and we will therefore also propose measures to increase the mutual recognition of civil and commercial law judgements.
The area of justice is essential if the internal market is to function properly. Without an area of justice, the internal market is merely theoretical and not a fully functional instrument. We will submit a scoreboard in order to take stock of our progress in this and other fields, a bona fide chart showing the results we have achieved as well as the problem areas. We were requested to implement such a system in Tampere and undertook to do so, and the Common Area of Justice is therefore one of the fundamental objectives.
The environment is one of the most serious issues we have to deal with: every year, fresh problems arise which almost outweigh our successes. Our task is tantamount to a labour of Sisyphus. We must make every possible effort, because if we do not salvage our environmental policy and do so dramatically, it will be almost impossible to make up the lost ground. We have adopted a White Paper on environmental liability containing the strategy for achieving the goals set in Kyoto on the reduction of emissions; we must now work on the general legal framework for the environment as a whole and on the legal framework governing genetically modified organisms. We must also present an overall framework and a strategy for the European chemical industry, or our endeavours will indeed be fruitless.
Another area which I would like to mention as an example of the detailed nature of our plan, is an issue which is very closely related to the environment: fisheries and the exploitation of natural resources. We must set up a programme for reducing the number of fishing boats, as there is no longer a balance between catches and natural breeding. We must re-establish this balance and protect the environment, while, at the same time, we have a binding obligation towards those whose livelihood depends on fishing, and they are concentrated in some of the least industrialised areas in Europe. We will also make every effort to conclude the agreement with Morocco, and we will have to simplify European fisheries legislation, as the existence of 20 or so different regulations is creating disorder and does not ensure that that balance which we were discussing is maintained. Our point of reference for the environment is the 2002 Rio +10 Conference, which will take place ten years after the Rio Conference, and at this conference we must have tangible results to present.
Energy is a particularly important topic at this time, as I feel that Europe must increasingly make itself heard on matters of energy. After enlargement, we will be the largest consumers of energy in the world. We therefore undertake to present a document on the different energy sources, intended to safeguard resources.
With regard to transport, we are committed to creating a single European Airspace. Vice-President Loyola de Palacio is making tangible progress in this area, and the framework will be complete in a few months' time. There is also the matter of the safety of maritime, as well as air transport, which is related to the issue of the environment and is of primary importance.
The last point covers consumer rights and health. The priority in terms of consumer rights is the safety of products and services. The citizens need clearer legislation in order to be protected against such dangers as misleading advertising. In this field the citizens do have the absolute right to be made completely aware of all the aspects of the product they are buying. We have prepared a health strategy, and we are going to adopt an action plan on health which will, of course, be related to the food safety programme which we discussed a short while ago. 2000 is the year which will see the completion of the proposal for the European Food Agency: we have already seen the White Paper and the autumn will bring the law which will implement this latest initiative. To this must be added other proposals on animal welfare which are currently being drawn up and which has featured prominently in the debates which have taken place over recent months.
These are the lines of reasoning behind the annual legislative programme. They differ from the reference framework of the five-year plan in that they are very detailed and tangible. I could, of course, give other examples in other areas, but the underlying features are a precise agenda, timeframes and responsible action. This is, so to speak, our daily turnover, the delivery of the products we have promised to the European citizens. In fact, these matters are of close relevance to all of our lives, and this is why Parliament' s role is absolutely crucial. Your role is to bridge the great divide between the institutions and the European citizens, and we must work together in order to be able to give the citizens quick, clear, tangible answers. The other day, we closed the debate with the statement that the measure of our success will be the number of European citizens who vote in the next European elections. I feel that the tangible measures I have touched on today are building up the citizens' confidence in their government and fostering our relationship with them.
Mrs Maes has the floor for a point of order.
Maes (Verts/ALE). (NL) Mr President, Parliament has been informed of some correspondence between Mr Prodi and Mrs Fontaine, in her capacity as President of this Parliament. In his letter, he levelled heavy criticism at our Committee on Budgetary Control regarding the way it carries out its function. We have not received a reply from Mrs Fontaine yet, but you will understand - and your presidency will feel the same - that this letter has caused a great deal of consternation, to put it mildly.
Mr Prodi has also written a letter to Mr Sderman in which he criticised the way in which Mr Sderman thinks he should exercise his duties. Mr Sderman has replied to this letter, and we do have this reply. We would like to know how the presidency has dealt with this correspondence.
Mrs Maes, the issue you have raised will be studied by the Presidency and the Conference of Presidents immediately.
The next item is the Council statement on the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention - humanitarian law.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, just a few months ago we marked the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Conventions on the protection of victims of armed conflicts. Fifty years ago, 63 countries signed the four conventions and two protocols which still provide a basis for international humanitarian rights today. It is worth remembering that these international legal instruments were established during the period immediately after the Second World War and at that time reflected the major concerns felt at international level following the devastating effects of that conflict. Events since that time have demonstrated that those who considered it essential to strengthen the rights of individuals in war zones, including civilians and military personnel not directly involved in the conflict, were totally justified.
A new code of ethics has accordingly come to be applied to the actions of parties to conflicts, in terms of strengthening the dignity of human life, which has increasingly become enshrined in international law in various other areas.
Unfortunately, in reality, it has become evident that the binding nature of the conventions and the way in which they are enforced by no means meet the requirements of the situations in which they are intended to provide protection. We are still continuing to witness acts of war marked by barbarism and a total denial of the rights of civilians and of military personnel outside combat zones. The behaviour of many states and many parties to armed conflicts fails to reflect any principles whatsoever and is characterised by an "end justifies the means" approach. And it is not unusual for civilians to be the particular target of military action, either in the form of terrorism or as an instrument of political pressure.
On the other hand, the unusual nature of certain conflicts, in particular those fought on a civil war footing, is increasingly being taken as an excuse for more serious crimes which are often carried out under cover of a shortage of information to the outside world and a kind of scorched earth policy intended to secure victory at all costs, and even at the cost of genocide. In cases of this kind, acts affecting more vulnerable social groups take on a particular importance and are even more shocking. Such indefensible acts ultimately expose children and the elderly to all kinds of inhumane actions, so that they are today the main victims of certain types of conflict, and sometimes even seem to be singled out to set an example.
The question of humanitarian organisations comes in here too, as their scope for action is frequently affected by the intolerable behaviour of certain parties to conflicts who are cynically trying to win time to seal their victories or to take retaliatory action affecting populations at risk. It is important to carry on strengthening these organisations' freedom of action and the protection of humanitarian workers. In this context, I would particularly like to draw attention to the International Committee of the Red Cross, whose reports demonstrate that specific action is needed to improve the way in which the Geneva Conventions are applied. And if it were not for the media and the new role they now play in spreading awareness of conflicts - not to mention these conflicts power to shock and mobilise the international community - the situation that we are witnessing today in certain war zones would be even worse and the level of impunity would be even greater.
Mr President, the European Union, which advocates and practises a set of values which we are proud to say is at the forefront of the international community, has been emphasising the vital importance of observing the Geneva Conventions. In the context of its external relations, the Union promotes these values and seeks to implement them at all times through its political actions. We are therefore alert to any risk of weakening the principles that unite us in this area, and we have always denounced any violations through our common foreign and security policy. In such cases we seek to use the instruments available to us to exert pressure in a timely and effective way. We are aware that in many cases we have not achieved everything we might wish, but we firmly intend to continue in future with the same determination.
Mr President, despite the gravity and the frequency of human rights violations that the Geneva Conventions and their protocols attempt to prevent, I do believe that the new millennium gives us some cause for hope. This hope is primarily founded on gradually establishing an international set of values which means that it is already becoming difficult to take refuge behind spurious criteria such as cultural differences and national traits. Although it is a slow process, there can be no doubt that we are already on the way to establishing this new international set of values and that the process of information globalisation is assisting in this and helping it to take root in our societies' collective consciousness. Our citizens need to take this process on board in order to establish a mechanism for reacting to actions which show a lack of respect for the fundamental principles which should nowadays be regarded as our common heritage.
In creating international tribunals like those now dealing with the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, we have taken a step forward in making life more difficult for people who encourage acts which infringe the values of the Geneva Conventions. These people must start to realise that the world is no longer a place where impunity is the rule. If we can get this message across, we will certainly be helping to strengthen human rights and to give the principles which the Geneva Conventions and their protocols aim to protect the credibility and effectiveness that they need.
I congratulate the President for domestic reasons. I would now like to speak, on behalf of the Socialist Group, in this debate which follows what we consider to be a satisfactory statement from the Council on the Geneva Convention. I will begin with an initial comment explaining the reasons why my Group tabled a resolution on this same subject during the last session of Parliament in 1999. This resolution was never debated for reasons which we will not go into here.
It seems to us highly appropriate to speak in the European Parliament of regulations which have enriched humanity' s legal heritage and we should take every opportunity to recall and strengthen the validity of those instruments given the protection they offer and the rights they safeguard.
Another reason for adopting a resolution such as the one we are tabling is the fact that much of the work of the European institutions is aimed at finding balance and equality, and these are concepts which are almost completely incompatible with armed conflict. The main victims of conflicts - children, women and the population in general - are the first to be threatened and to suffer and we must make their protection one of the priority objectives of our action.
The more we do to prevent violations of international humanitarian law, the more we remind other states - by means of all the opportunities which our foreign relations offer us - of the need to ratify and respect the Geneva Convention and the more we will be doing to protect these weakest groups. The more suffering we prevent, the less action we will then have to take to repair the great damage caused by war.
What more can be done therefore to increase compliance with international humanitarian law and thus limit the suffering of the victims? For example, we can spread the knowledge of this law, particularly throughout society itself, amongst young people, within mass organisations and also in the armed forces and security services. Above all, we must, through education, instil a passion for peace amongst our citizens. In this respect, the European Union must be a prime agent for peace, but it must also provide strong support for the efforts of those organisations which the international community has entrusted with the responsibility of protecting the victims of conflicts and defending their rights. Amongst these organisations, we should highlight the International Committee of the Red Cross. All the institutions of the European Union must decisively support the work of the ICRC, because their role is quite simply indispensable.
Lastly, I do not consider it acceptable to say, as the Commission did in its response to my question a couple of months ago, that it does not have the competences nor the resources for actions aimed at promoting international humanitarian law, thereby demonstrating that its approach is basically bureaucratic and that its sensitivities are very different from those expressed by the Council in reply to another question in which I expressed a concern of this type. It is also different from the sensitivity demonstrated today by the Council in its intervention.
In this area, the institutions of the European Union - including the Commission of course - have a generic responsibility, because this is a question of spreading and promoting essential values which, furthermore, are the same as those which underpin our European project.
For all these reasons, Mr President, I ask you to support the resolution tabled, which contains all the main elements of the proposal presented by the Socialist Group at the end of last year.
Mr President, 12 August 1949 is a day which the ancient Romans would have said should be marked with a red stone. It signified a great step forward for mankind - and yet in the fifty years since, although our own half-continent has lived in peace, more people have died in armed conflict than died in the whole of World War II.
We have failed to spread the lessons and values learned from that conflict. Too often our own Member States have been parties to conflict, either through the production and sales of weapons, through the production and distribution of landmines or through the temptation - in the words of a great Victorian statesman in my country - to prefer their wars to be fought at a distance and wherever possible in the name of God. We have failed to educate against the glorification of combat in our own communities. We have failed to educate against the problems and the scourge of racism and xenophobia.
Evans, Robert (PSE). Mr President, my point of order relates to Rules 148 and 135 regarding the distribution of the minutes and particularly regarding roll-call votes.
All Members have, this morning, received a booklet containing 113 pages of roll-call votes. I am sure this is of interest to a number of Members and there will be a few Members who want to look at it. But in the interests of economy and the environment, I would suggest that Parliament look again, or ask Parliament's services to look again, at the interpretation of the word 'distribution' .
Perhaps the results of roll-call votes could be distributed on the Intranet or made available to Members who need them so that we do not have the waste and the superfluous nature of everybody being distributed with a 113-page document listing roll-call votes. I wonder if you could ask the services to have another look at this please, President.
Thank you, Mr Evans. Your comments will be passed on, not to the services, of course, but to the Bureau. If you were also to add the cost of each of those votes to Parliament' s budget, there would be even more cause for concern.
The next item is the report (A5-0066/2000) by Mrs Ferrer, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council decision on the Community position within the EC-Mexico Joint Council on the implementation of Articles 3, 4, 5, 6 and 12 of the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters [5965/1/2000 - C5-0076/2000 - 2000/0024(CNS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the debate I am opening under the very long title you have just announced represents the final phase of Parliament' s work, carried out in close contact with the Commission, to strengthen relations with Mexico on the basis of the principles and values which underpin our democratic system.
In May 1999 Parliament gave its assent to an Economic Partnership, Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement, signed in 1997 between the European Community and its Member States, on the one hand, and Mexico, on the other. Once it has been ratified by all the Member States, it will replace the cooperation agreement signed between the Community and Mexico in 1991.
In May 1998 Parliament gave its assent to a provisional interim agreement on trade and related issues associated with the 1997 agreement. The aim was to enable negotiations on liberalising the trade aspects of the global agreement falling within the Community' s competence to begin as soon as possible, without having to wait for ratification by the fifteen Member States to be completed.
Now that these negotiations have been concluded and the Council has expressed its view on their content, it falls to Parliament, in response to the Council' s formal consultation, to give its opinion on the results of the negotiations. Here I want to thank the Commission for making this consultation by the Council possible in close cooperation with Parliament - I am delighted about that and I hope it will set a precedent. However, I am sorry it did not adopt the commitment of the previous Commission to keep us informed of the progress of the negotiations, given the importance of the issues involved.
Turning to the substance of my report, the first thing I want to highlight is that, although we are dealing with an implementation agreement exclusively concerned with trade, there is a political dimension to bear in mind in expressing our opinion. This is the case because the text my report covers is set in the context of the Economic Partnership, Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement, and that agreement is a reflection of the will to promote a genuinely democratic political system, respect for human, social and environmental rights and a fairer social balance, thanks to the greater economic development the liberalisation of trade will generate.
In fact, Article 1 of that agreement makes respect for democratic principles and human rights, in the widest sense, an essential factor and the very foundation of the agreement.
Again, the inclusion of a clause on fulfilment of obligations, providing for the agreement to be suspended in case of failure to meet the obligations laid down in Article 1, also guarantees the commitment of the parties to democracy and respect for fundamental rights.
In addition, by institutionalising cooperation between the European Union and Mexico, especially on human rights issues, social affairs and the fight against poverty, an instrument is being created which could be extremely useful for reducing the social inequalities which persist in Mexico and for improving the living conditions of the less advantaged strata of the population.
My second point, relating to the content of the negotiations on the implementation of Articles 3, 4, 5, 6 and 12 of the interim agreement, covering trade in goods, public procurement, competition, the consultation mechanism for questions relating to intellectual property and dispute settlement, is to highlight the fact that this package of measures represents a good agreement. Although for certain sectors there may be flaws - I am thinking specifically of the textiles sector, where the rules of origin issue causes great concern - the effects will be beneficial for both the European Union and Mexico. For the European Union, because the establishment of a free trade area will enable it to rebuild the presence Member States had in Mexican markets before the NAFTA agreement came into force, involving new expansion opportunities for European companies. For Mexico, because it will be able to diversify and introduce balance into its external trade, currently 80% dependent on its NAFTA partners, and at the same time increase the volume of its exports to the European Union, with the consequent favourable impact this increase will have on the Mexican economy.
Of course, during the transition period, and until all products have been fully liberalised, the agreement will be more beneficial to Mexico than the European Union, but this asymmetry also takes account of the levels of development and competitiveness of the European economy as compared with Mexico' s.
All the same, in spite of this asymmetry, Community producers will clearly be in a much better position to compete in the Mexican market than they have been up to now.
For all these reasons, ladies and gentlemen, and by a very large majority, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy recommends a vote in favour of the Council Decision on the result of negotiations whose benefits we must monitor to make sure they genuinely contribute to promoting a more democratic political system and respect for human rights and social justice.
Mr President, I should like to talk about a particular issue in order to highlight the risk of its posing a serious problem to the European economy and society.
I refer to the European rule of origin of shoes introduced in the agreement between Mexico and the European Union. There is a standing agreement between the Commission and the shoe industry that the rule of origin should apply, owing to increased competition in the industry at global level.
Unfortunately, the precise opposite has happened in the agreement with Mexico. Another rule of origin is being applied: Mexico' s rule. By definition, this works to the detriment of the European shoe industry, which is required to export to Mexico at a loss.
Consequently, there is an export quota of 865 000 pairs of shoes from Europe to Mexico. In other words, with a population of 90 million Mexicans, we have agreed to export one pair of shoes per 100 inhabitants in Mexico. This is hardly a resounding success. Anything but, in my view.
I should like to express the disappointment of these small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union shoe industry by saying that this problem cannot be solved by our claiming that there is a derogation in the agreement. This particular derogation from the rule of origin affects some 15 000 small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe and
650 000 employees. I hope we do not have many more of these derogations because they will only compound the problems we already face.
Mr President, last night, we were faced with the unwelcome news on EDF (German TV channel) that Mr Hombach, the EU Balkans Envoy, has been placed under investigation again by the Public Prosecutor. We have already had serious problems of this kind to contend with, as has the previous Commission, but in this particular case the accusation has been levelled that DM 300 000 were allegedly paid to an agency with nothing being received in return. I call upon you to inform the Council of this and to urge it to relieve Mr Hombach of all his duties until such time as this investigation has been resolved in a conclusive and legally valid manner. We cannot afford for the European Union to make a bad impression again.
Yesterday evening after the votes in the Chamber, a comment was made which I would like to distance myself from and not to be associated with. There was no mistake in the interpretation and Members of this House did refer to the Technical Group as the Technical Group of Racists. This was an unfair comment. No one could, by the wildest stretch of the imagination, consider someone like Emma Bonino a racist.
People need to be extremely careful how they treat other people in this Chamber. Some people may not like the fact that the Technical Group has been set up, but it has been. These Members were elected just like me and every other Member in this House and we have to accept that fact. People have rights and I do not think that the comment that was made yesterday was acceptable.
Mr President, when, in the sitting on Monday, I thanked the French State, the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament for the fact that we could only get sound on the Finnish television channel and that the taps runs cold water but not hot, I did not mean that this is how it should be, but that these things should be put right. I hope that the French State, the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament will be able to take steps to put such small matters right in so expensive a building.
Very well, Mr Seppnen, we also take note of your comments.
Mr President, on seeing the Minutes, I am horrified to note that I have once again failed to sign the register of attendance, although I participated in a quite considerable number of roll-call votes. I would ask that my attendance be recorded in yesterday' s Minutes.
Mr President, I do not have any comment to make on the Minutes, but I do want to say something about the European Parliament' s information services. I do not know whether I have picked the right moment to say this. It does not concern the Minutes, but relates to something else. Can I go ahead? Right then, a fellow MEP has just given me the session news about the debate we had yesterday on the Ludford report, and I am disappointed to note that it makes no mention of the statement I made on behalf of our Group. I would ask the parliamentary services to look into why it was left out.
I can assure you that the services will look into this very closely, Mr Poettering.
Mr President, further to yesterday' s minutes, I would like to express my great disappointment at the fact that even fewer than 200 Members attended the votes yesterday. I conclude this from the minutes.
Very well, Mr Manders, we take note of all of that.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 17 March 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on Tuesday a terrible accident took place in Kitzsteinhorn, near Salzburg. Eleven people were killed in an avalanche and that is not the final death toll. It may be worse yet. The next few hours will tell. I would simply like to tell you that at these difficult times my thoughts, indeed our thoughts go out to the victims of this disaster and to their families.
Madam President, the verbatim report of proceedings for 16 March did not record my speech in full. I should like to correct it because the meaning has been distorted. It says: "I am therefore able to tell the House that both Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen have valid passports without any form of restriction." Now comes the mistake: "Neither signed the declarations of renunciation required by the constitutional office, because they "have distanced" themselves from the house of Habsburg" is what is recorded in the verbatim report of proceedings. It should read "will never distance" .
Madam President, I call upon you, our President, but also upon the Council and the Commission to clarify certain questions, raised by the events of the last few days, with the Turkish government. Firstly, the existence of a blacklist of Members of Parliament and representatives of NGOs whom the Turkish government deems undesirable. Secondly, the arrest, which took place at the very time when a delegation from the European Parliament was visiting Turkey, of Akin Birdal, a human rights campaigner who, apart from anything else, was in a very poor state of health when he was taken back into custody. In addition to this, there has been a marked return to suppression of journalistic activities, which has been documented in a report by other sources as well.
We feel that these actions taken by Turkey against Members of Parliament are cause for very serious concern. I would like the Turkish government to be asked to clarify whether blacklists also exist for European countries other than Italy.
Thank you, Mrs Morgantini. We shall, of course, look into the matter thoroughly.
Madam President, I am rising to speak about what has just been said by Mrs Morgantini.
In my capacity as chairman of the Socialist delegation which visited Turkey, on Monday evening, after speaking to the Prime Minister, Mr Ecevit, to raise the situation of Mr Birdal and Mrs Zana, and to express our concern - and I would like to point out that we were able to receive the first report which is being discussed by the Turkish government on adapting the Turkish constitution and legislation to the Copenhagen criteria - we held a meeting in the Commission' s headquarters in Ankara with representatives of the NGOs, including Mr Birdal, who participated very actively in the meeting.
Yesterday, Tuesday morning, Mr Birdal went to prison to serve the sentence that the Turkish courts have imposed on him. From Turkey we expressed our vigorous condemnation of the fact that a person who has fought for human rights for many years, like Mr Birdal - who has not paid with his life in this struggle, although he has unfortunately paid with his health - had gone to prison. We also expressed our opinion - which I believe is not only that of the Socialist Group but also of the whole of this House - that, in order to set Turkey on a path which may lead to a good relationship conducive to full accession, it is clearly necessary - as the Turkish government is now saying - to amend the constitution and the legislation and also to implement a law of amnesty so that people such as Mrs Zana, who is in prison, or Mr Birdal, who has just gone to prison, do not have to pay for crimes of opinion which fortunately do not exist in any of our countries.
Madam President, you will remember perfectly that, at the last plenary part-session which we held here in Brussels, all the political groups, without exception, condemned the murder of the Basque Socialist Member of Parliament, Fernando Buesa, at the hands of ETA. Since then, Madam President, dozens of Spanish and Basque citizens have been victims of attacks, extortion and threats of a type that can only be described as fascist. In fact, almost every day we witness events that take us back to the darkest days of European history.
The Spanish journalist, Carlos Herrera, is a symbol of all those victims, Madam President, and I would like to ask you, on behalf of the European Parliament, to convey to him our feeling of solidarity, because this solidarity expresses the unquestionable defence of freedom of expression that we, as democrats, are obliged to make.
Thank you, Mr Galeote Quecedo. Of course, we all remember the very moving debate we had right here on the subject. We can assure the journalist in question of this institution' s complete solidarity and opposition to this truly disgraceful act of terrorism.
Madam President, I would like to inform the House of an incident which occurred at a joint meeting between the European Parliament Delegation for relations with Canada and its Canadian counterpart, which was here on a visit last week. Mr Sturdy, the chairman of our delegation, was unable to attend at that precise time, Madam President, but he has written to you this morning to confirm what I am about to say.
Something quite astonishing for this type of meeting occurred. The chairman of the Canadian delegation suddenly launched into the most obnoxious personal attacks upon myself, for no reason whatsoever, to the point that the other members of his delegation spoke up to disassociate themselves from his words. Everyone was quite dumbfounded by this attitude.
This is regrettable in the extreme, since this was an otherwise excellent visit, and because we wish to maintain the best relations with Canada, after so many difficult years, principally due to conflicts over fishing. It is imperative to restore good relations, and we therefore deplore this incident most strongly. Madam President, I should like you to ask the Canadian government for some explanation of the significance of these declarations.
Of course, Mr Berthu. This is certainly a quite regrettable incident. Indeed, I seem to remember, as you have just stated, that the members of the Canadian delegation expressed their regrets at this incident and offered their apologies.
Madam President, 13 April will see the start of the trial, in Iran, of thirteen Iranian citizens who are of the Jewish religion. Since they are being charged with spying for the United States and Israel - who have denied any connection with them - there is every likelihood that the thirteen citizens could face the death penalty. Madam President, I know that you have already intervened, at the request of certain Members of Parliament, to request that a delegation of the European Parliament be allowed to attend the trial, but if I am not mistaken, the Iranian government has, as yet, neither granted nor refused our request. I must ask you to intervene once again, and I also call upon the Commission to intervene, to ensure that human rights are fully observed in the course of this trial, so that thirteen people are not condemned to death for reasons unknown, given that this Parliament has repeatedly declared its opposition to the death penalty.
I would like to thank you in advance for your efforts and for the endeavours of Parliament and the European Commission to protect freedom and respect for the rights of the defence in the trial of these thirteen Iranian Jews.
Madam President, I think anyone reading page 6 of the Minutes might get the wrong impression from the juxtaposition of my speech and Mr Vander Taelen' s.
I want to stress two points. First, Mr Vander Taelen may disapprove of my position on the European Union, but it can in no way justify the wholly unfounded personal attacks against me by the Chairman of the Canadian parliamentary delegation. Anyway, Mr Vander Taelen admitted he did not personally witness the incident.
Secondly, I simply cannot understand how Mr Vander Taelen could have got the impression I was against enlargement. I have never said that. On the contrary, I have stated time and again in this House that enlargement is an historic necessity. I have just pointed out that the institutions in their present form undoubtedly constitute an obstacle to enlargement, but that is an entirely different issue. Of course I am in favour of the enlargement of the European Union to the East.
Thank you, Mr Berthu. We will scrupulously check whether there are grounds for amending the Minutes so that everything is as it should be.
Madam President, although I was not the speaker, it was Mr Katiforis, I see that in the Minutes, he is reported as having said that the Turkish authorities had also drawn up a list of Greek people living in Turkey. He did not say that. He simply said "of Greek citizens" , in other words people who are resident in Greece. I say this because Mr Katiforis is not here and so that the Minutes can be corrected accordingly.
Madam President, this is not about the Minutes but about a point of order. I was contacted several times yesterday and have already been contacted several times today, by people from the press who have got wind of the fact that the Court of Auditors sent you a report yesterday on the funding of the political groups. I am aware that this is a very tricky business and that we must prevent any half-baked stories from getting into the papers. The question on quite a few people' s lips is: what is to become of this report? Will it be made public? I understand that the chairmen of the groups have been able to have a look at the report. I would like to ask you what you are intending to do with it. Will you find a way of making it available to the press or to those who favour doing so, appending a few comments, yes or no? I believe we must adopt an open and transparent strategy here, so that we can say in all candour how we dealt with the funding that was made available to the groups.
It is standard procedure, Mr Staes. The Court of Auditors sent me this preliminary report and it is going out to consultation. I have in fact circulated the report to the Chairment of the groups asking them to let me have their comments so that we can forward them to the Court of Auditors. After that has been done, the Court of Auditors will draw up its final report.
I do not think it is up to the President of Parliament to issue this report to the press. This is not a lack of transparency. It is not up to me to do it. I have done what I had to do, which was to send it to each Group Chairman concerned.
Madam President, I learned yesterday that Mr Akim Birdal, the former chairman of the Turkish Committee on Human Rights has been reimprisoned. Mr Birdal had asked to be released on health grounds, after being attacked. That request was refused and he is in prison because, some time ago, he dared to suggest seeking a political solution to the Kurdish question.
I think it would be very welcome if you, as President of the European Parliament, were to approach the Turkish Government, in whatever way you consider appropriate, and ask for this man of honour to be freed.
Quite, Mr Wurtz. We raised this matter yesterday and I am completely in agreement about approaching the Turkish Government along those lines.
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the existence of an artificial intelligence system allowing the United States of America to intercept and monitor all telephone and electronic communications within the European Union, a system called 'Echelon' .
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, following on from the letter sent by this House to the Council and from the hearing of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs regarding data protection in the European Union, you have today invited the Council and Commission to comment on the possible existence of the Echelon system. This system is suspected of intercepting telecommunications beyond the bounds of any legal framework of justice and home affairs activities. I must thank you for having invited the Council to speak on this issue. This gives us the opportunity not only to clarify our position but also to inform you about all the measures taken by the Council on the lawful interception of telecommunications.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 30 March 2000.
Madam President, for the past six months to a year, the Committee on Development and Cooperation has been calling on the Commission to do something about the drought in Ethiopia. Nothing has been done although there was an instant reaction from the Commission when the fact that 12 million people are under threat of famine in Ethiopia came to public attention. I suggest that this week, as a matter of urgency, Commissioner Nielson be called to this House to explain the delay by the European Union in responding to a drought that has been continuing for the past three years.
We seem to be able to get weapons there for the Eritreans and Ethiopians to continue the war of aggression against each other over nonsensical issues and, at the same time, while the European Union and the Western World export weapons to Ethiopia and to Eritrea, the famine continues and the lives of millions and millions of people are threatened.
I have been in this House since 1984, and rarely have I seen such neglect - such wilful neglect - by the European Union in dealing with a famine of this kind that we knew was on our doorstep. It is a great shame that every time an issue like this is raised with Commissioner Nielson, or raised with the Commission, he passes it off as if it did not matter - as if he did not believe this was happening. Commissioner Nielson must come to this House and explain his use of PR men and spin doctors in this disgraceful display of neglect. Despite statements to the contrary, they can most certainly get two billion dollars' worth of weapons into the conflict in Ethiopia and Eritrea. The whole issue is a reflection on the inability of this House to act.
Mr Andrews, there is of course no need to start a debate on the subject. I should just like to point out that in a few moments the House will be voting on whether to add another item to the 'Human Rights' section and one of the proposals made by two groups is specifically to do with the problem of the famine in Ethiopia.
Madam President, as many of us know, last Friday saw the inauguration in Vienna of the Monitoring Centre for Racism, Xenophobia and Antisemitism. I would like to thank you for your forceful intervention. At this very important juncture, you said that racism, xenophobia and antisemitism are totally incompatible with the defence of human rights and the dignity of the human person. You stated this very clearly and powerfully and thus sent a message of confidence to the people of Austria and to all the other peoples of Europe. Many MEPs, representing almost all the Parliamentary groups and many of the Member States, were present, as of course were many Austrian MEPs and the President of the Committee on Citizens' Rights, Graham Watson. They all asked me - and I am very willing to act as their messenger - to thank you for your speech, which made us proud to be Members of this House.
Thank you, Mr Imbeni, for your extremely kind words. I would like to tell all the Members of Parliament who attended this moving and very important ceremony how well I believe we all represented the European Parliament, and I know that none of the participants failed to notice our attendance in large numbers. I believe it was very important for this House. Thank you, Mr Imbeni, for your comments.
Madam President, if I have been informed correctly, the Council has postponed its statement on Iraq and it will not now be made this week. Would it be possible for you to ask the Council to make a statement on Ethiopia in place of the statement on Iraq? This point would then be filled, depending, of course, on whether the Council is able to oblige.
Mr Hnsch, we shall deal with this point when we come to the draft agenda in a few moments, and we shall make a decision at that time as to how to handle the situation.
Madam President, I should like to draw your attention to an internal matter. Some members of staff of the European Parliament both here and in Brussels, when they try to enforce European Parliament rules - in other words, no smoking in no-smoking areas or any of the other European Parliament rules - are sworn at and abused by some Members of Parliament. In other parliaments ushers are treated with the respect that they deserve. I would hope that happened in the European Parliament. If the situation does not improve, do you know if there are any disciplinary procedures we could take against those Members who treat the staff in such a disrespectful manner?
Disciplinary procedures? I do not think so, but I do promise to consider very carefully the comments you have made regarding both the no-smoking areas and attitudes towards the ushers.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, reading the international press is an interesting activity should one wish to know how certain MEPs keep themselves occupied here. Most of the time, the press reports are read with a certain element of interest, fascination or surprise, bearing in mind that the European Parliament is a House which comprises many chambers. One can form one' s own opinion and keep quiet.
However, there was one incident last week about which we cannot keep quiet any longer. During an outing as part of his election campaign, a prominent Member of this House, Mr Berlusconi, thought it necessary to make extremely hurtful jokes - they were not even remarks - about people dying of the terrible disease of AIDS. You will have to forgive me if I tell you what Mr Berlusconi said, but I think it is difficult to judge if you do not know the content. Mr Berlusconi made the following joke: do you know why an AIDS sufferer needs to take a bath filled with sand? The answer is in order to get used to lying in the soil. These words were spoken by a Member of this House. I refuse to believe that anyone here would keep calm if this joke was aimed at Jews or blacks. I think that a reaction from yourself, Madam President, would be wholly appropriate. I would, at the same time, ask the chairman and leader of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats for his opinion on this matter. I can only say that these remarks have shocked me deeply. In solidarity with all the millions of people who suffer from this terrible disease, I can only express my shame on behalf of the honourable Member, Silvio Berlusconi.
Thank you. The Member you have quoted is not here to answer you or to defend himself...
Madam President, we have read in the newspapers that five million euros' worth of Parliament property has been purloined and that Parliament' s finances have been poorly managed. In addition, a report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities is due shortly on the use of resources by Parliament' s political groups, and it is not a flattering picture. These are big issues, and Parliament must address them seriously.
I wish to speak about some small matters which I would not normally raise in the parliamentary plenary session, but it is astonishing that the bureaucratic machinery of the House is unable to rectify such small matters. I have already, on many occasions, bemoaned the fact here in plenary that Parliament' s television system fails to produce a picture for Finnish television. Finland is the only country whose television picture cannot be picked up in Parliament. I would have hoped that such a small matter as this would be sorted out. The Dutch often complained about the lack of Dutch television during parliamentary part sessions. They now get two channels, and I hope that we Finns will now get at least one. And then, might we not still hope for hot water in the pipes, which has not been available during this new Parliament' s term of office? I have already complained about this on various occasions in parliamentary sittings. What is the problem with you bureaucrats, that you cannot sort these things out in this House? Meanwhile you allow five million euros to be stolen!
Mr President, item 6 of the Minutes where we modify the agenda for the week is accurate but probably rightly does not mention that voting time on Thursday has been brought forward to 11.30 a.m. because of the large number of amendments tabled to certain reports. I rise, therefore, to question whether Rule 139(1) of our Rules of Procedure is being applied correctly.
As you know, we spend an enormous amount of time voting on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday lunchtimes. We adopted a set of changes to the Rules of Procedure last year to try to rationalise our work. In these changes we gave every Member the right to table an amendment as an individual at committee stage, but we limited the right to table amendments in plenary to 32 Members or a political group.
However, if you look at the amendments that have been tabled on Thursday, for instance to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, you will see that there are over 100 amendments which are tabled by individuals, supposedly in the name of their political group, but this may well not be the case.
I notice, for instance, that the EPP Group has over 100 amendments in its name but signed by 18 different Members, none of them the coordinator or leader of the group. Over 20 of these amendments are contradictory, so they cannot possibly all be the position of the EPP Group. Some are identical, tabled by different Members; and there is even a case of two identical amendments being tabled by the same Member. Could the EPP Group please get its act together!
So much time is spent and wasted on voting as it is and this is a way to get around the rationalisation of the Rules of Procedure we adopted as a Parliament last year. Amendments must either be tabled in the name of 32 Members or in the name of a political group and actually represent the position of that political group, not of the individual who happens to table them in the name of the group so as to circumvent the limitation on tabling rules in plenary.
I would ask the sessional services to verify in future that such amendments really are in the name of a group.
Mr President, I should just like to let Mr Corbett know that within the EPP Group an amendment cannot be put before Parliament unless it has been voted in the Group and has the support of the Group. He should be quite clear about that procedure within our Group.
Secondly, as he is aware, there is a process going on at the moment for reforming Parliament. If he has any suggestions to put to the Bureau about the voting procedures, that would be the correct way to go about it.
Mr Corbett, I will pass on your comments to the President, and the Bureau will look into all our working procedures in May.
Mr President, I was present yesterday and I signed the register but my name does not appear in the Minutes. I should like that to be corrected.
Mr President, in the capacity of draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the granting of discharge for 1998, I would briefly like to mention that, last night, a partly joint committee meeting was held, involving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation, about the Rhle report. During that meeting, agreement was reached, in principle, to adopt a compromise approach which was subsequently refined. In practice, this means that the existing text will be replaced by a new joint compromise proposal, which will, in effect, lead to a delay in the proceedings and a reconsideration in June. The political groups will undoubtedly submit this text some time this morning and the debate will be able to take place as normal, but it is useful for the Members to know that this debate actually took place last night and that, in actual fact, a new political situation has arisen in which the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation once again agreed on what we consider to be a more positive approach.
Mr President, I should just like to say in reply to Mr van den Berg that the report on postponing discharge for the Structural Funds is ready and the vote will be taken on the premise that this is indeed merely a postponement and does not grant or refuse discharge and that everything which we worked on together yesterday will be taken into account in the final version, i.e. that we shall nonetheless debate and vote on Mrs Rhle' s report.
Mr President, I have a request; every member has a very precise timetable. We agree on a great number of deadlines in the citizens' interest. Today, yet again, the sitting has been brought forward, this time to 8.30 a.m. I think it would be conducive to greater overall efficiency if we stuck to a basic programme and stopped changing arrangements at short notice. Thank you for your understanding.
Mr Rbig, look upon it as an exceptional decision taken in response to specific requests from the Portuguese Presidency.
Mrs Ludford, are you sure your point of order is related to the Minutes?
Madam President, I signalled I wanted to raise a point of order, although it is not actually on the Minutes. I do not want to delay the House unduly, but I think that as we prepare to debate the construction of Europe, it is important to take note of a landmark court judgement in the UK.
The so-called historian, David Irving, has lost his libel case against the American academic, Deborah Lipstadt, who accused him of manipulating evidence to deny the Nazi genocide of the Jews. The judge has ruled, in a devastating judgement, that he was "an active Holocaust denier, anti-Semitic and racist and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism" .
This judgement is important, not just for Europe' s past, but also for its present. With the rise in racism and anti-Semitism and the electoral success of extremist parties, this judgement boosts the fight to make Europe a society free of racism and at ease with diversity.
Thank you, Mrs Ludford. I am happy to take note of your point of order. But for the time being I would like comments to relate to the Minutes, so that we can adopt them. After that Members are free to move any other points of order.
Madam President, item 2 of the Minutes on page 5, which is in fact the first substantive page, refers to the points I raised about certain political groups apparently not respecting the Rules of Procedure in that they appear to allow individual members of their group to table amendments in plenary, supposedly in the name of the group, although this cannot possibly be the case because contradictory amendments are tabled in the name of the same group.
I would like to underline that although the Minutes mentioned specifically the EPP Group, it is in fact not the only group to have acted in this way. For instance, the Technical Group, the TDI Group, which did not table any amendments at committee stage whatsoever, has now arrived in plenary with between 20 and 30 amendments, many of which are contradictory. They are tabled by different members within that group taking different positions and therefore cannot possibly be a group position. That does not respect our own Rules of Procedure, which allow only 32 members or a group to table amendments in plenary.
Madam President, my point concerns the section of the Minutes on Question Time yesterday evening, when I raised a point of order. First of all, Question Time was put back to 6:30 p.m., then it was announced on the screen that it would begin at 6:50 p.m. In the end it was after 7:00 p.m. before Question Time started. The first part was supposed to last 30 minutes, according to the Agenda; but it lasted much longer.
Basically, my problem is that I had questions down - as some other people did - to Commissioner Byrne. We had group meetings at the time and saw on the screen "Question 41" . But by the time I reached the plenary, you had moved on automatically within a few minutes to Question 49. So five or six people had questions down to Commissioner Byrne, but none of us were here to ask the questions.
Commissioner Byrne seems to have taken offence at this and seen it as some kind of snub. But it is very difficult for Members to sit right through every single question during Question Time just in case we jump from No 1 to No 99 in a matter of seconds. So, could we please stick to the Agenda: thirty minutes for the first part of Question Time, twenty for the second part and so on. We should not keep changing the Agenda because then it is extremely difficult for us to operate.
Thank you, Mrs McKenna. I take note of your comment and will ensure this does not happen again.
Madam President, in recent days, immense natural catastrophes in which quite a number of people have died have again occurred on the banks of the River Tisza. I would therefore ask the President to send our condolences to both the Romanian and Hungarian parliaments. At the same time, we must be alert to the kind of environmental risks these natural catastrophes may entail for our common European environment. The Tisza flows into the Danube delta, which is one of the world' s most significant protected areas of environmental interest.
Thank you, Mrs Thors, I am quite prepared to do so.
Madam President, with rather more levity. Last night in the Committee on Budgets when the refreshments were being distributed, Mr Colom pointed out that the small cartons of milk were marked "for distribution in schools only" . Had it said "for schoolchildren only" one could understand why it was being distributed in the European Parliament, but it was marked "for schools only" . Could we find out why this has happened? It is so embarrassing. I know we campaigned for more school milk but, on this occasion, we did not want it here.
Thank you, Mr Wynn, I cannot answer you right now, but I will have the matter investigated.
Madam President, I wish to inform you and the Members who come into daily contact, although sometimes without noticing them, with the Parliament staff who ensure the running of the House as a whole, that certain sections (security guards, receptionists, firemen) were on strike yesterday afternoon. They were protesting at having to work 12 hours at a stretch, day and night, for an average net salary of FRF 6 000, without even receiving extra pay for night or weekend work. I want to express my solidarity with them. Moreover, we have written you a letter, Madam President, on behalf of the LO and LCR Members, and hope you will follow the matter up.
The next item is the report (A5-0073/2000) by Mr Knrr Borrs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation clarifying Council Regulation (EC) No 2223/96 as concerns principles for recording taxes and social contributions (COM(1999) 488 - C50220/1999 - 1999/0200(COD)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing here today a subject of an extremely technical nature, of the type which, at first sight, appears to refer purely to issues involving the adoption and transposal of procedures and terminology within the European Union, which is the political framework to which they are to be adapted, as is the case with certain instruments in the statistical field.
We are all aware, or at least I think we are, that it is important that statistical data is not only reliable, that is, obtained scientifically and rigorously, but also, above all, comparable. This is particularly true with regard to the shaping of the European single market, a context in which we require statistical data which is comparable and equivalent between the different Member States. I would even go so far as to say that this is even truer, if that is possible, in view of the enlargement of the European Union, a process in which the availability and comparability of information, particularly statistical and economic information, must be treated as absolutely crucial.
I do not intend to dwell on the qualities of ESA 95 - the European System of Integrated Economic Accounts - nor on the progress which it represented in relation to the previous 1979 system, an issue which I spoke about in the House at the time of my report on the proposed Council Regulation amending the Regulation on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure. What should really be underlined is that, in my view, we must firmly support a Commission proposal which, essentially with regard to an issue as serious as the budgets of the Member States, is inclined to give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than criteria such as the amounts due in the field of taxes and social contributions. It is common knowledge, or should be common knowledge, that there are occasions when administrations may record, as due, amounts which they will never collect, however many analyses of collectability are made, and this therefore leads to what is tantamount to a concealed falsification of the public deficit.
This is a serious issue which has been debated. We should remember that in the Parliament of a Member State there was also a great argument between one of the candidates for the presidency and his opponent, and current President, in which the candidate, Mr Borrell, rightly condemned widespread use of the criterion of income which, since it had not been duly corrected, in reality amounted to a concealment of the deficit in the public accounts.
Ending this type of practice requires clear principles, as the Commission proposes, which in addition allow, very correctly in my judgement, for the calculation of income with the option of using amounts collected or the amounts recorded in a tax document.
This course of action by the Commission, which some people attack because in short they believe it does not once and for all end the practices of concealing deficit, in no way intends to distort the assessment of the amounts in the national accounts but, on the contrary, to arrive at the same figure in two different ways. One, in my view the more correct way, or at least the more academic way, is the criterion of income, with the corresponding provision concerning collectability, set out in paragraph (a) of Article 3 proposed by the Commission, and the other, set out in paragraph (b) of Article 3, is the criterion of cash receipts adjusted to take account of the time difference between the activity and the cash tax receipt at the end of the financial year. Both calculation procedures should inevitably lead us to the same figure, which will be the outcome of the tax in that financial year. I would also add that there is no other accounting method which would correctly record revenue in a budget. On the other hand, it is obvious that the option to use either of the two methods offers the advantage of a speedier adaptation on the part of those who choose one or other of the systems.
Therefore, I consider that the Commission proposal regarding the treatment of taxes and social contributions in the accounts is both the most correct one and, from every point of view, is effective in view of the possibility that it can be applied immediately. Nevertheless, we believe that, in order to encourage Member States to gather statistical data, even aggregated data, concerning taxes on products, Article 3 of the Commission proposal should deal with this issue by establishing a similar mechanism for recording and adjusting such taxation.
I therefore take a favourable view of the proposal and I congratulate the Commission. I would like to repeat that the proposal rightly stresses that we should give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than the taxes and social contributions due in the Member States, and allows these two methods of calculation, which make it possible for the systems used by the Member States to be adapted.
A study of the Commission proposal shows that the treatment of taxes and social contributions should indeed follow the two proposed methods.
Finally, I would also like to stress that, consistent with our opinion that the Commission proposal is more an amendment than a clarification and that, moreover, it affects basic concepts, instead of using the procedures under Article 2(2) of Council Regulation 2236/96 of 25 June 1996, for the adoption of changes to the methodology intended to clarify and improve the content of ESA 95, use should instead be made of the introduction procedure set out in Annex A of that regulation.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to ask you, and also the Commission, for your help. I would be grateful if you could please keep strictly to your speaking time, as our timetable is very tight. Although Commissioners can, of course, talk for as long as they wish, I would ask them to help me in this regard as well, so that we can finish on time.
Mr President, a Europe that is functioning properly needs transparent and comparable statistical material on its Member States, not least with regard to recording taxes and social contributions. We have rightly reached agreements in this respect in the European system of national and regional accounts, ESA 95. On closer examination, it now appears that the information recorded on taxes and social contributions is not as precise as was hoped because it does not always correspond to the amounts actually collected or collectable for a particular assessment year.
The aim of the proposal under discussion is to refine the recording procedure by applying a correction factor both to cash data and data evidenced by assessments and assessment registers.
The PPE-DE Group agrees with the Commission proposal in this regard. Two questions still remain, however. In view of the fact that the proposal effectively contains an amendment to the ESA 95 Regulation and that is implicitly acknowledged by the fact that we are applying the codecision procedure, it does seem logical to grant the Member States a transitional period. The Member States also need time to adjust to new rules. We have therefore tabled an amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group and would ask our colleagues in the House and the Commission as well to support this amendment.
A second question to the Commission concerns the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs regarding VAT as a basis for calculating the third source of own resources. I should have liked to hear the Commissioner confirm whether the Commission is indeed drawing up a proposal to amend Article 8 of the ESA 95 Regulation to the effect that all the Member States will, in the future, have an adequate legal basis to use ESA 95 for the calculation of the third source of own resources, that is to say, VAT. I should like a reply from the Commissioner and also, of course, a response from the Commissioner to our amendment.
Mr President, the Commission' s initiative on presenting this regulation intended to unify the principles for recording taxes and social contributions is very appropriate. In order for the accounting methods of the different Member States to be homogenous, as the rapporteur has pointed out, they must use the same criteria. It is true that, in accounting terms, both the cash receipt criterion and the income criterion can be allowed, but it is also true that the former allows for less juggling of the figures intended to distort the true accounts situation of a country.
In short, the cash receipt criterion makes it more difficult to indulge in that accounting trickery which used to be known euphemistically as 'creative accounting' . It is true that the use of those systems has allowed, for example, certain countries to fulfil the Maastricht criteria, but it is also true that their abuse can distort the picture of a country' s true accounts. As you know, accounts which do not offer a true picture can be called anything but accounts.
The income criterion, if it is not corrected, for example, by means of the obligation to make provision for non-payment, is an inadequate criterion. The rapporteur mentioned a debate which occurred in Spain which, in short, resulted from the government claiming ESP 750 000 million in 1997 as social security income, which was theoretically owed but which was clearly never going to be collected. Thanks to this manipulation of the accounts, to this 'creative accounting' , the deficit criteria for joining the first phase of economic and monetary union were complied with. Obviously, this juggling of accounts will not be possible if the Commission' s proposal is approved. It is perhaps for this reason that the Spanish Members from the PPE Group have presented certain amendments and have tried to delay the approval of this report.
It is not a question of revising now what was done in the past. Ladies and gentlemen, what is done is done. It is a question of demanding, from now on, greater rigour; it is a question of demanding that accounting figures reflect the true picture of a country' s accounts.
We therefore approve of the Commission' s proposal but we do not approve the PPE' s proposal, which is intended to delay the entry into force of this regulation, or the amendments of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which, since it considers that the regulation amounts to an amendment rather than a mere clarification, in reality delays its entry into force.
Ladies and gentlemen, if rigour in accounting is demanded, it should be so from the outset.
Mr President, firstly I wish to thank Mrs Thyssen for her gesture and for her defence of the amendment we are presenting. I also wish to thank and highlight the patriotism of Mr Berenguer and Mr Knrr. This patriotism is consistent because ESA 95 was adopted by the Socialist government, to whose party the former belongs.
Having said this and leaving aside accusations which are truly libellous at the moment, I would like to defend the idea of an extended transition period of two years.
Mr President, I should like to say that I cast a vote in error yesterday afternoon on the question of referring the bananas issue back to committee. We in this Parliament risk setting ourselves on a course which will fail to help the banana growers and, at the same time, will continue to inflict grave injustice on small enterprises engaged in producing things like bath products and ...
... I therefore wish I had cast my vote the other way. I wish that to be placed on the record.
Mr President, I only wanted to report my presence for the Minutes. I will not be signing the attendance register as I am leaving in one hour, but I wanted everyone to know that I am here.
We can all see, Mrs Van der Laan, that you are here.
Mr President, we were somewhat confounded yesterday by an action of a Member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, but I think that what I am about to announce will not come as a surprise to anyone here, as I explained at length on Monday what I am about to request. In fact, you have also received several e-mails and I have also written to the Conference of Presidents on the matter. The fact is that according to Members of various groups, the agenda on Fridays is too light, as a result of which many Members genuinely believe that their time can be spent more productively elsewhere. Consequently, there are few of us here today and we cannot guarantee that our electorate is adequately represented here. We therefore believe that a choice needs to be made: either we need to give more substance to Friday' s agenda or to abolish the Friday sitting. In this context, I wish to ask for the quorum to be checked.
I think that we all know the rules by now. Mrs Buitenweg, you cannot request this on your own. Such a request must be made by at least 32 Members. I will check if there are sufficient Members present who wish to check the quorum.
I notice that more than 32 Members have made this request. We will have to establish whether there is a quorum. You will undoubtedly know that there is a quorum if one third of the MEPs are present in the Chamber.
I note that there is no quorum and that the vote on the Pesl report will therefore take place in the next part-session.
Mr President, firstly I would like to ask you to determine an exact figure and to carry out an electronic check during the roll-call vote so that we know who is here and who is not.
Secondly, I would like to say that I share the concern of my colleagues who want to upgrade Fridays. I am always here as a member of the so-called "Friday Club". I also want to upgrade Fridays, but through work and not through sabotage.
Mr Posselt, the Rules of Procedure, which I have followed to the letter, are very clear on this and do not allow the electronic voting system to be used. They also specify that the outcome of the vote shall not be made known. It is up to the President to establish that there is no quorum.
Report by Mr Maat (A5-0074/200), on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the markets in milk and milk products [COM(1999) 608 - C5-0047/2000 - 1999/0246(CNS)]
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 14 April 2000.
Madam President, I would like to make a statement on this International Press Freedom Day on the situation in Tunisia and request that you intervene. I will do so when you consider it to be appropriate.
Thank you, Mr Barn Crespo. I have taken note of your proposal.
Madam President, I rise to speak on the same matter. We have just learnt that the brother of Taoufik Ben Brik has been sentenced to three months in prison. Everyone here realises that this decision makes the situation critical as the Tunisian journalist had announced his intention to continue his hunger strike until he died if his brother were imprisoned.
I have just read the piteous appeal that Taoufik' s young brother has made to the Tunisian journalist to urge him nevertheless to end his hunger strike. I therefore feel that the immediate future could be decisive in terms of reminding the Tunisian authorities of their responsibilities.
That is why I join my friend, Mr Barn Crespo, in urging you, as I did in a letter yesterday - and the situation has become even more urgent given recent events - to use your influence and your authority to obtain a fair and speedy solution to this tragic case of the violation of human rights and freedom of the press.
Madam President, I am going to raise a point of order in the literal and true sense of the word. I am referring to the disarray in Parliament' s calendars and agendas, at least for this current year. For example, on 19 April, I received an e-mail from the Quaestor, Mr Richard Balfe, which stated that that day was a restricted day and that the meetings planned for that day were cancelled. On 13 April, we had received a departmental note stipulating which days were holidays and which were not.
I would ask Parliament' s competent bodies to plan and draw up timetables a year in advance, although I understand that unforeseen circumstances may require subsequent changes. However, to change dates, as this departmental note indicates, to introduce holidays which did not exist before, is a serious lapse in planning in an institution with 600 MEPs and thousands of employees. I would kindly request a little attention and organisation in relation to annual planning.
Mr Valdivielso de Cu, I promise you that I shall look into these matters very closely, but Mrs Banotti would like to take the floor to answer you in her capacity as quaestor.
Madame President, many colleagues have approached me about misunderstandings relating to signing-in yesterday. I would just like to say that I propose to raise this matter with the Bureau this evening. There was definitely a misunderstanding and many colleagues, in order to be here for the plenary today, had to leave home yesterday and incur the usual expenses. So I hope we can raise this at the meeting of the Bureau later today.
Thank you, Mrs Banotti. We will have the same situation on Whit Monday. We will certainly have to keep a close eye on that.
Madam President, I wanted to take the opportunity to inform you and the other delegates of the fact that Mr Paul van Buitenen, the Commission official who, as you know, has played a not insignificant role in the uncovering of the previous Commission' s failure, received a royal honour in the Netherlands last week. I would like to add in all modesty that at least in the Netherlands, his work has always been - and still is - greatly appreciated.
Madam President, I want to mention the publication of a very important report a fortnight ago from the European Committee for the prevention of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment. The report is to the Spanish Government on the visit to Spain by the European Committee at the end of 1998.
The report is accessible via the Internet, as is the Spanish Government' s response. A week ago, a Spanish Court sentenced five former government officials, including a Civil Guard general, to up to 71 years in prison. The sentences ended the second so-called "dirty war" trial and added weight to allegations that a dirty war, sponsored by the former Socialist government of Filipe Gonzlez, was waged in the early 1980s.
According to the international agencies, Associated Press and Reuters, two youngsters of 20 and 21 years of age were driven across the border into the Spanish Basque area where they were tortured for several days. They were both killed by a gunshot to the head. All seven defendants were absolved of charges of torture and belonging to an armed group. The sister of one of the victims told reporters that it was shameful that they were not convicted of torture. It is important to know about this matter.
Madam President, coming back to a point that was raised earlier on: 9 May is, as you know, Europe Day and Parliament will be closed. There is, however, a meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market being held on that day. Will members of the public be allowed to attend that meeting as observers or will they be barred from entering the Parliament?
Thank you, Mr Miller. The answer is yes: the public will be allowed to attend the meeting.
Mr President, I would like to make a correction to my statement on the EC/Switzerland agreement, because since 1 May this year, Mr Jrg Haider has been neither a member of the government nor the leader of Austria' s Freedom Party. As such, the grounds for the sanctions imposed by the 14+1 on one Member State should be rescinded immediately.
Mr President, I would like to make the following comment in connection with the Minutes: reference was made in the Maat report on school milk yesterday to the fact that the Community' s contribution to financing shall be equal to 75% of the target price. It says 65% in the German version of the Minutes. Would you be so kind as to check again whether the various language versions are all in order?
Mr Goepel, the services have already informed me of this error and all the versions will be corrected.
The next item is the report (A5-0096/2000) by Mrs Fourtou, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Commission' s Green Paper 'Combating counterfeiting and piracy in the single market' .
Mr President, I would like, above all, to thank the Commission for appreciating the risk involved in the phenomenon of counterfeiting and piracy. Their Green Paper initiative is a clear demonstration of their determination to tackle the problem, and I should also like to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and on the committees whose opinion was requested, who have made a considerable contribution to the enrichment of my work.
Piracy and counterfeiting constitute a risk to consumer health and safety. Spare parts for cars and aircraft, toys and pharmaceutical products, all of which endanger the lives of consumers, are to be found on the counterfeit market.
Piracy also jeopardises innovation and the very future of certain firms. By way of example, I would cite the hundreds of thousands of jobs lost every year within the European Union due to this. Counterfeiters take advantage of the investments made by bona fide industry in new product research and development and in advertising. This also undermines the fiscal resources of the state authorities.
Finally, it has been established that this phenomenon is often closely linked to organised crime. My report advocates a coordinated overall approach in order to combat piracy and counterfeiting. This approach has two aspects: prevention and law enforcement.
If we are to prevent this scourge, we must first familiarise ourselves with it. We therefore propose an extensive public awareness campaign, with whatever programmes the Commission can suggest, and increasing awareness among the police, judicial and customs authorities. We plan to set up training schemes for these authorities and a cooperation plan involving the exchange of know-how and adoption of best national practice.
Prevention must also involve strengthened cooperation between the private and public sectors, and the legal protection of technical arrangements, while obviously respecting consumer rights. Indeed, making allowances for consumer rights and the legitimate demands of professionals is one of the difficult aspects of this report.
Of course, each Member State has its own internal regulations for law enforcement. In order to make them more effective, we must endeavour to harmonise current legislation and thereby remove the disparities between protection systems. Obviously, penal sanctions must be made more stringent and civil measures and procedures must be simplified. The approximation of the penal sanctions applied by different nations in the case of customs offences is certainly desirable. It will also be appropriate to pay particular attention to matters of international judicial cooperation.
To conclude this brief overview of my report, I shall say that the effective protection and implementation of intellectual property rights must be an absolute priority in negotiations with countries seeking accession to the European Union and in all relations with third countries.
I shall add that we should try, in our plenary sitting, to preserve the consensus which emerged in committee when voting on this report, in order to ensure that the European Parliament thereby gives a strong political message as to its commitment in the fight against counterfeiting and piracy.
And finally, I appeal to the Commission, which I hope will submit its proposed action programme for responding to the urgent nature of this phenomenon in the very near future. Since the matter would indeed seem genuinely to be one of absolute urgency, especially as regards piracy in the audiovisual media, the Commission must not fail to respond in a decisive and urgent manner.
Mr President, I am sure that we are all aware that piracy and counterfeiting constitute a very serious problem. Perhaps I do not need to point this out. There is clearly a risk that research, innovation, advertising investment, in short, innovation as a whole, will come to a standstill if industrial property rights are not adequately safeguarded. This is why these rights must be protected.
There are certain factors that have exacerbated the current problem, perhaps the most important of which concerns the technical advances that have been made, which enable computing, audiovisual and phonographic material to be easily reproduced very cheaply. The available figures for forgeries in these areas are scandalous.
What concerns us, then, is the impact that the completion of the internal market will have on the problem. In a Europe without borders, but having various legal systems, counterfeiters will obviously always choose the legal system that is the most beneficial to their own criminal ends. The Commission' s initiative in drafting the Green Paper is therefore praiseworthy, as it will initiate a debate to which all sectors concerned can make a contribution. We must remember that this debate will focus more on the contents of harmonisation than on harmonisation itself, since this harmonisation is the starting point that all parties have accepted.
It may be premature for the European Parliament to enunciate its position on certain points, the precise content of which will emerge from the debate which is now beginning, but in some cases, it may be appropriate to establish this content. This applies, for example, to the issue of the right to information. It is precisely because we are aware of the problems encountered when introducing such a measure with regard to other laws in the past that we have to support the introduction of a law obliging vendors of illegal products to identify their supplier, as long as legislation on data protection and the constitutional right not to incriminate oneself are protected.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 4 May 2000.
- Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on Saturday, a horrific accident struck the people of Enschede, in the Netherlands. There was an explosion in a fireworks warehouse which has already caused at least sixteen deaths and has injured over six hundred people, six of whom are in a critical condition, with many more people reported missing. Around four hundred homes have been destroyed by the explosion, and more than a thousand have suffered damage. This is one of the most terrible disasters in the Netherlands since the second world war.
I have contacted the Dutch authorities to express our deepest sympathy, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament. At this sad time, our thoughts go out to the victims, to their families, and also to the emergency rescue teams who are working tirelessly. Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to observe a minute' s silence.
Madam President, on behalf of the 31 Dutch delegates of this European Parliament, I would like to convey to you my heartfelt thanks for the words you spoke a moment ago and for the respect this Parliament has shown for the victims of this terrible disaster in Enschede and for their relatives.
Madam President, on behalf of the 31 delegates, there is actually little I could add to your words. I would, however, like to underline how we have been moved not only by what you said a moment ago and the silence that was observed, but also by the prompt assistance across the borders to relieve the distress following this disaster. At a moment' s notice, German colleagues joined forces with their Dutch friends to carry out the frequently dangerous activities which were necessary to control the disaster. German hospitals too have been involved in the care of the wounded, dozens of whom are still in hospital. I find this an example of European solidarity which is what we stand for in this Parliament.
On behalf of the 31 delegates, I would also like to thank the Commission which immediately expressed sympathy in the form of a letter from Mr Prodi to the municipality of Enschede. I would like to ask the Commission to consider what kind of a role it sees for itself in relieving distress and in preventing terrible disasters of this kind in which so many citizens are involved.
I am extremely grateful to you on behalf of the 31 for the sympathy this Parliament has shown, and I can see in our Parliament a true representation of the European solidarity which this continent so desperately needs.
- On 7 May last year, terrorism of the most undiscriminating and brutal kind once again struck in Spain with the murder of Jos Luis Lpez de Lacalle, a journalist and co-founder of the Forum d' Ermua, a peace movement of Basque intellectuals. The terrorists intended to strike a blow at one of the most precious assets of democracy, freedom of expression. This forum was founded after Miguel ngel Blanco Garrido, a municipal councillor in Ermua, was murdered by ETA in July 1997. This forum means to affirm that intimidation and blackmail are not enough to silence consciences.
Throughout his life Jos Luis Lpez de Lacalle fought to defend freedom and democracy. After spending five years in prison under the Franco regime, he fell victim to another dictatorship, that of terrorism.
That very day, I made a point of staunchly condemning this act of barbarism and of expressing, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament as a whole, our deepest sympathy and condolences to his family and the newspaper he worked for. I also notified the Spanish Government of our utmost support in the fight against terrorism.
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 11 May 2000 has been distributed.
We can have five items in the Human Rights section. At the moment, we only have four. We therefore have the opportunity to add a further item, and I have received three requests. A request from the GUE/NGL, the Greens and the TDI to add a new sub-item entitled "Tunisia" ; one from the PPE Group to add an item on "Spectator safety and the prevention of hooliganism at the forthcoming European football championship" ; and an item from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to add a new sub-item entitled the "Situation of Bhutan refugees in Nepal" .
I shall therefore put these requests to the vote in the order in which I received them. Firstly, though, Mr Cohn-Bendit wishes to speak in support of the request by the GUE, the Greens and the TDI.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the association agreement between the European Union and Tunisia has been in force since 1 March 1998. Since then we have not had a single major debate on Tunisia, and there have been no topical and urgent motions. Every time one of the groups can be relied upon to say, "Yes, it is important, but you must see that Mr Ben Ali is still just settling in." We have all read the reports in the papers of the status of human rights and freedom of expression in Tunisia.
I find it outrageous that every time we attempt to discuss this, we are prevented by Members of Parliament and the Tunisian Government. I find it outrageous that one of the two major parties is trying once again to put off any debate or any topical and urgent motion on fundamental freedoms in Tunisia. Our Group is therefore asking everyone to stop listening to the leaders of the two main parties, and instead to act like independently-minded adults and resolve at long last to have a debate on the situation in Tunisia.
Let us have the topical and urgent motion, and we shall see what majority there is for human rights, and what majority uses human rights purely in the interests of its own party and resorts to tactics when the situation is sensitive. In opposition to a tactical stance on Tunisia, and in favour of frank and open debate, I urge you to vote in favour of the topical and urgent motion and to table the situation of human rights in Tunisia.
Madam President, for my part I wish to speak on a constructive rather than on a polemical basis. I think this is indeed an opportune moment to have a debate on human rights in Tunisia. It must be held this week because today the trial of Taoufik Ben Brik' s brother is taking place in Tunis and tomorrow a delegation of Members of the European Parliament, from my Group, the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists will be returning from Tunis. This week we are also due to be visited by the President of the Tunisian League of Human Rights and perhaps by Mr Taoufik Ben Brik himself. In view of these circumstances and the importance of the European Parliament decision to take action to encourage the release of Mr Ben Brik, I think it particularly appropriate for us to enter this item on the agenda.
Mr President, the Committee on Industry considers that this is an extremely important issue and should be dealt with as a matter of great urgency.
We all know the reasons why the situation affecting Montenegro is a complex one and we should not, for obvious reasons, delay this matter any further.
I therefore propose producing a simplified report so that we can vote on urgent procedure.
Mr Wynn, chairman of the Committee on Budgets, asked for an opinion, has the floor.
Mr President, we are in a strange situation because a decision was taken in the groups before the Committee on Budgets had decided on this issue of Montenegro. Also, I have not had a chance to speak to my good friend Mr Westendorp. I believe that the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy is sympathetic to the position of the Committee on Budgets, which I am about to state. However, since I have not spoken to him directly, do not quote me on that - it is only second-hand information.
Firstly, I should like to make it clear that the Committee on Budgets supports any aid to Montenegro. It has done so in the past and will do so in the future. On this occasion there is no urgency for this to go through now. The monies will not be made available until August for the first tranche and the second tranche will be paid at the end of the year.
We are of the opinion that the relevant committees need to study the details of this proposal. Whichever the lead committee is - Foreign Affairs or Industry - we would merely give an opinion, but those committees and Parliament need to evaluate these proposals. We should not be bounced into a decision because the Council deems it to be necessary.
As for budgets, our main concern is where the money is coming from. It is great to make proposals but we feel this urgency should not be agreed upon until we know where the money is coming from. We should leave it until next month. The committees can debate it and we can vote on it at the June part-session.
Thank you Mr Wynn. That is a very sensible opinion.
Mr Newton Dunn, vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy has the floor to explain his committee' s opinion.
Mr President, we have not discussed it in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, but my personal view is that we should not accept urgency now.
Mr President, in my opinion, this proposal has been submitted under rather strange procedural circumstances. Despite this, as speaker on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I am of the opinion that the urgency is such that we need to take it extremely seriously. Accordingly, regardless of the mistakes in the procedure, I have to say on behalf of my group that we would like to support this request for urgent procedure after all. I also have a feeling that other groups in this House from the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy share the same view. It might be helpful to verify this.
Mr President, I am in favour, although I take the view that it is not quite as urgent as the Council makes out. However, it would be an insult to the people of Montenegro if we rejected this urgency today. Montenegro is in great danger, especially from Belgrade, and I think we should send out this signal. However, we should wait until the Commission finally tells us where it intends to find the money. It cannot take it away from Bosnia. It cannot take it away from Kosovo. It needs to tell us where it intends to find the money and if we reach a decision on this today, we must carry out an evaluation half way through and say what has happened to the money and where the second tranche is to come from.
Mr President, firstly, I am against the urgency for the reasons expounded by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets. There is, in fact, no urgency because the money would be released for August.
Secondly, if we look carefully, in the line which has been applied until now, there are still EUR 20 million which have not been used. Therefore, there is no uncertainty and no urgency and we can study this issue again, calmly, at a later date.
The next item should be the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001. Unfortunately, the Commissioner has not yet arrived, although she is on her way. I therefore propose that we examine the next item on the agenda.
The next item is the report (A5-0121/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the estimates for the European Parliament' s income and expenditure for the financial year 2001.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it would truly have been a great honour to speak directly after the Commissioner' s presentation of the Commission budget 2001. Instead, I have the honour of presenting Parliament' s budget before the Commissioner presents the larger budget to us.
Mr President, I would like to make a comment in relation to yesterday' s Minutes. I do not appear amongst the signatories of the attendance register. I was present all day yesterday and during the vote which took place at noon, but I do not appear in the Minutes. I would be grateful if this error could be corrected.
We will check the list, Mr Valdivielso de Cu, and make the necessary correction.
Mr President, I would like to inform the House, under Rule 111, that last Thursday, the offices of the Moss Media Group in Moscow comprising independent television and a number of newspapers and magazines were raided by so-called tax police, uniformed and armed. Documents were taken away, the telephones were cut off and threats of legal action remain. Mr President, this matter is one of the utmost importance. It involves freedom of the press in Russia and further outrages are expected over the next two or three days. Mr Robin Cook is in Moscow today. He will discuss the matter with Mr Ivanov, the Russian Foreign Minister, and the 15 Ministers are thinking of a joint dmarche. But we in the European Parliament - what are we doing? Nothing. The matter is, if you like, too urgent to take on board because it happened last Thursday and cannot be brought forward as an urgency. Could you please refer this question to the Conference of Presidents so that some system can be found to deal with very urgent and important matters such as this one?
We take note of your comment and your suggestion, Lord Bethell, and we will pass them on to the President.
Mr President, I would just like to make the House and the Presidency aware, as I believe it will be of interest to them, that yesterday, on the occasion of the Conference of Reconciliation in Vienna, an agreement was reached between the Austrian government representative, Mr Schaumeyer, and the American Deputy Finance Minister, Stuart Eizenstat, on compensation payments for the victims of Nazi forced labour in Austria. The lawyers - and I feel I should take the opportunity to mention this as well - Michael Hausfeld and Martin Mendelson, who represent some of the governments of Eastern European countries, commented at the time that, in some respects, Austria is in fact providing more generous compensation payments than Germany, because in the first place, we are including the agricultural workers, and secondly, we are also paying compensation for children under the age of 12 and women who gave birth whilst in forced labour camps. I believe this is worth sharing with the House.
The next item is the report (A5-0134/2000) by Mr Katiforis, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission recommendation for the 2000 broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community (drawn up pursuant to Article 99(2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community).
. (EL) Mr President, broadly speaking, the report tabled before plenary by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs contains a particularly positive appraisal of the Commission' s recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States. The committee has worked with its usual efficiency and diligence and has supported its proposals with an impressive econometric analysis which I should like to praise here in public.
The recommendation for the year 2000 has been formulated at a time of favourable developments and optimistic prospects for the European economy. The prospects of an increase in the national wage in Europe in excess of 3% for 2000 and 2001 - 3.4% according to the latest forecasts for 2000 - are much higher than the disappointing actual average rates of increase throughout the 1990s. These results, provided that they are realised, offer a window of opportunity, a springboard from which the European economy can launch on to a course which will lead to a permanently high and ecologically sustainable rate of growth. It goes without saying that permanently high rates of growth are the sine qua non for improving the employment situation and strengthening the competitiveness of Europe in the global economy.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepts that the requisite rate of progress is best expressed through a growth rate of GDP of 3% or more, that this rate cannot be maintained over time without a substantial rise in the potential product of the EU economy and that there can be no increase in the potential product without productive investment. The Commission, however, has avoided specifying the ratio of investment to GDP. The Committee on Economic Affairs takes the view that quantitative economic targets may be useful, but insists that the fixing of such targets must not undermine the goals established in the stability pact, which are the fundamental guide for the economic policies in the euro zone. Despite this general reservation, the report by the Committee on Economic Affairs expresses the committee' s satisfaction at the restatement in the Commission recommendation of the quantified target, set in the Presidency conclusions of the European Council at Lisbon, of raising labour force participation from 61% to 70% of the population by 2010 and of increasing the participation of women from 51% to over 60% by 2000.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs maintains that the requisite economic growth must be based on price stability and budgetary discipline, reasonable wage increases taking account of price stability, productivity increases and a reduction in unit labour costs, even in the case of reductions in working hours. It also believes in greater liberalisation of competition, strengthening national competition authorities, providing special support for associations of small- and medium-sized enterprises and further developing the single market - especially in the public utilities and financial services sectors. As far as financial services are concerned, having reached a broad consensus of agreement, we shall be tabling a joint amendment calling for the action plan for financial services to be applied more quickly, i.e. by 2003 rather than 2005. The majority of the committee believes that mobilising the market will result in the need to increase investments using purely market instruments. At the same time, however, it approves of the restructuring of government spending in favour of investment which must be justified - when it is justified - by the cost-benefit ratio, but rejects using public investments simply to manage the economy.
On a more general note, the committee approves of the challenges identified by the Extraordinary Council in Lisbon of full employment, a knowledge-based economy, modernisation of social protection systems and dealing with the impact of the ageing population, but expresses its concern at the gap between the key challenges and the often routine specific policy recommendations. It therefore calls upon the Commission and Council to seriously consider the need for a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind the general guidelines.
The committee also reiterates Parliament' s previous call for an interinstitutional agreement between the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament on the subject of the adoption of the resolution, although it thanks the Portuguese Presidency for its willingness to cooperate on this matter. This is ad hoc cooperation, however, not cooperation reflected in an interinstitutional agreement, and we consider this a shortcoming in our procedure.
Ladies and gentlemen, we achieved a significant degree of consensus in our work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. I should like to stress the general acceptance of the feasibility of the objective of achieving full employment within the next decade. Of course, there are certain differences in our assessment of the best way of achieving these targets. Some of us believe that setting quantitative targets, even without mechanisms for imposing them, would help Europe give concrete expression to its efforts to move in the right direction. This comment applies in particular to the target investment rate, which requires us to increase the potential rate of growth of the economy to 3% on a permanent basis. This percentage is a familiar figure. The Commission set it repeatedly in its studies and it would not have hurt to have included it. We could also have given more categorical expression to the, I believe, general feeling that we need to relaunch the trans-European networks and address the need for new forms of financing for them and the issue of the involvement of private capital and public investment in this sector. Without, in any way, giving the green light to squander public spending, we could have tried to give the public sector of the economy a slightly more positive role than merely that of 'guard-dog' for price stability. There are margins for all this, especially through the window of opportunity, if the main risk to our economy is from the probability of a crisis on the American money markets which could paralyse the private investment mechanism. Just imagine, ladies and gentlemen, if that were to happen and we, in the meantime, had forgotten how to handle public investment. The European economy has a huge margin for growth; it is true that the European economy can become more productive, but we need to be bolder in the way we go about it.
Mr President, when drawing up this draft opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the Committee on Social Affairs fully appreciated the importance of this resolution, Parliament' s first resolution on economic policy guidelines since the Lisbon Summit. In particular, it stressed the importance of the connection between these two priorities and considered that the common elements of the broad guidelines of economic policy should be fully exploited and the various implementing processes adopted by the Councils over the years coordinated, and by this I am referring to the objectives of the Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne processes. In our opinion, the open method of coordination, which was introduced on an experimental basis in Lisbon, should allow for the full exploitation of the connection between growth and employment, which, we feel, cannot be ignored.
The subsidiarity principle needs to be steered in this direction with regard to the role both of the governments and of the decentralised institutions, without diminishing the decisive part played by greater synergy, greater coordination between the broad guidelines, and by placing greater focus on the European Community dimension with a view to developing an economic policy which can enhance the potential for development in Europe and allow us to effectively achieve the goals which we set ourselves with regard to full employment.
Madam President, I requested the floor in order to express the profound dissatisfaction of a number of Italian Members - most probably all the Italian Members and, I imagine, the dissatisfaction of the majority or the whole of this Parliament as well - at the statements made by President Kuan yesterday. We fully approve his condemnation of Slovenian nazi and fascist oppression which he expressed in his speech before the European Parliament yesterday, but we cannot accept his failure to condemn the horror of anti-Italian ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the Communist regime immediately after it came to power. In particular, we cannot allow the massacre and eviction of the Italians to be described merely as a measure intended to combat collaboration with nazis and fascists, in the spirit of Potsdam and Yalta which divided Europe and from which Europe has had to regain its freedom and unity and is still in the process of doing so.
The events in question were a series of crimes against humanity in which the methods of ethnic cleansing that, tragically, have recently been employed in other parts of the Balkans, were developed for the first time. Italy is well disposed towards the Slovenian population and supports the entry of Slovenia into NATO and the European Union. We were of the opinion that the 1995 Solana agreements had provided a fair solution to the Italy-Slovenia disputes. We cannot understand why President Kuan is putting forward fresh interpretations of past events which are totally unacceptable and harbouring unfounded fears regarding the future. Yesterday, President Kuan issued a statement via the Slovenian Embassy saying that the controversy was caused by translation errors and that it was not directed at Italy but at Austria. Well, in our opinion, an action contravening human rights, which is a crime, is just as reprehensible whether it is directed at the Austrians or the Italians.
Madam President, I call upon you to take steps to inform the Slovenian government and President Kuan of the profound dissatisfaction of this Parliament at his unacceptable statements, which certainly do nothing to create the appropriate climate for the negotiations on the accession of Slovenia to the European Union, negotiations which, we hope, will reach a positive conclusion.
Madam President, I wholeheartedly support Mr Buttiglione' s speech and, on behalf of the Forza Italia delegation of which I am head in the European People' s Party, I cannot forget the suffering of the Italian people in the former Yugoslavia at the end and during the immediate aftermath of the Second World War. A genuine ethnic cleansing operation took place and disputes still remain which have not been resolved. Some Italian citizens are still waiting for their rights to be respected.
We are on extremely good terms with Slovenia, but we cannot forget past events or allow them to be forgotten. The Europe which is just emerging, our common home which we are building together, cannot disregard the past. We cannot create a Europe which does not condemn the atrocities perpetrated by Communism and Nazism. Therefore, Madam President, in addition to calling upon you to make authoritative representations to the Slovenian Government, I also invite all the Members of Parliament to sign the declaration calling for the institution of a day dedicated to the Shoah, to the holocaust, to be observed throughout the European Union.
Madam President, we know President Kuan and we are aware of his regard for Europe and the good relations which have been established between Italy and Slovenia. We do not feel there is cause for concern but we would certainly like the matter to be clarified, and I would like to say that we regard the Spanish compromise managed by Mr Solana as non-negotiable. Clearly, there is no question mark over any of this, and, therefore, I also consider that it would be appropriate for you to obtain clarification of the issue. We entrust the matter to your wisdom and authority.
I propose to the three speakers that I write to Mr Kuan to inform him very respectfully of your remarks. I should probably also give him a very precise account of your interventions.
I believe that these reflect the feelings of a large part of this House. Thank you for trusting me to inform Mr Kuan of this situation as precisely and clearly as possible.
I have two statements to make. You should already have received the first one by e-mail. This concerns the practical problems encountered on some of Parliament' s premises. The Quaestors acted quickly to resolve this situation in the best way possible. They commissioned air analyses from the German company, Dekra, which identified certain failures which we have remedied as quickly as possible.
I thank the Quaestors, and particularly the President of the College, Mr Poos, for their prompt action. I myself immediately wrote to the Strasbourg authorities and the social services so that all the relevant authorities were informed. You should therefore have received this statement by e-mail.
Madam President, it is totally unacceptable that a building that cost millions of pounds, and which was officially opened less than six months ago, has thousands of faults and is now found to be a potential threat to the people who work in it. I trust that this problem will be raised in the negotiations for the final price of the building, which should strengthen Parliament' s hand in reducing the cost for the taxpayers of Europe.
My second statement concerns the information sent to me by the French Government regarding the receipt of a decree withdrawing the mandate of Mr Le Pen. You will remember that I informed the House at the time that I would ask the Legal Affairs Committee, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, to give an opinion on this issue. This committee has, on several occasions, examined all the aspects, particularly the legal ones, of this issue. I thank Mrs Palacio, the committee' s chairperson, and the committee members for their efforts. The discussions were extremely thorough and it was only yesterday, at 8 p.m., that I received Mrs Palacio' s letter informing me of the committee' s opinion on this issue. So that there is no room for error or misinterpretation, I would prefer to read you the letter.
'Madam President, during its meeting of 16 May 2000, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market re-examined the situation of Mr Le Pen. The committee is aware that the decree of the Prime Minister of the French Republic, of which Mr Le Pen was notified on 5 April 2000, and which was published in the Official Journal of the French Republic on 22 April 2000, has become enforceable. However, the committee has also noted, as mentioned in the letter notifying Mr Le Pen of the decree, that the latter has the option of appealing to the French Council of State. This appeal may be accompanied by a request to suspend the enforcement of the decree.
In view of the decision taken the day before not to recommend at present that Parliament officially take note of the decree regarding Mr Le Pen, the committee has examined the possible responses. The case of Mr Tapie was mentioned as a precedent to be followed in support of this decision. The result is that the European Parliament should officially take note of the decree withdrawing Mr Le Pen' s mandate only after expiry of the deadline for appealing to the French Council of State or, if applicable, after a decision by the latter' .
These are the contents of the letter sent to me yesterday evening by Mrs Palacio on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee. Once again, I thank her. I intend to abide by the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee.
Madam President, I am taking the floor to request that Parliament express its opinion in accordance with Rule 7(4) of the Rules of Procedure. If you will allow me, I will justify my proposal.
Madam President, a gross mistake has found its way into Item 34 of the Minutes of yesterday' s sitting concerning the adoption of the resolution on Euro 2000. The Minutes show this resolution to have been adopted by Parliament when in fact it was rejected by an overwhelming majority. Moreover, the resolution is also listed among the texts adopted whereas notification of its rejection should appear in this part.
Madam President, following your statement yesterday regarding the state of the air conditioning in the building, I have a slight problem in my position as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with Canada. I have a group of Canadian members of parliament coming to the next part-session in Strasbourg. I will have to take a decision on Monday as to whether they will be travelling to Strasbourg or Brussels. Bearing in mind the French position on the precautionary principle, can a decision be taken rather sooner than a fortnight on where we will be meeting next month?
Mr Sturdy, as you know, and as the Quaestors point out in the memo which you have received, checks will be carried out at Parliament' s three places of work, that is to say, Strasbourg, Brussels and Luxembourg. Unfortunately, we will then have to wait for the result of these checks.
I would therefore advise you to contact Mr Poos, so that he can keep you informed of the situation.
Madam President, I rise on the same point of order as my colleague, Mr Sturdy. It is essential that this Parliament should show by example and precept that it follows the same standards that it imposes upon everybody else. It imposes standards on beef in Britain and cheese in France and it must follow the same example in relation to its own conduct. I am perfectly prepared, in an extreme situation, to die for my country and my family. I am not prepared to die from legionnaire's disease because I have to sit in Strasbourg in June. Therefore we should do something about it now and not just talk about it.
This is why, ladies and gentlemen, we are taking every necessary precaution at all Parliament' s places of work.
Madam President, as you may well expect, we will not enter into a debate between French and British beef producers now. However, I have two questions to ask. Firstly, could the same checks be carried out for Parliament in Brussels? Secondly, in accordance with the precautionary principle, can Brussels continue to be a place of work for Parliament since it is not equipped with air purifiers?
I have already answered the first question, Mr Daul, since I told you that the checks would also be carried out in Brussels as well as in Luxembourg where many people work, and this must not be overlooked. The checks will therefore be carried out at all Parliament' s places of work, but Mr Poos will be in a much better position to answer you than myself.
Madam President, thank you for giving me the floor. I would like to inform and at the same time reassure the Members who have just spoken on this important and serious matter.
I should like to point out to them that the College of Quaestors has acted in accordance with the precautionary principle. In fact, if the College of Quaestors had not ordered an air quality check in these buildings, the problem would not even have been mentioned today in plenary. This check has therefore been carried out and, as you know, it proved negative on two points. We took the necessary steps immediately, namely closing the buildings where the problems were observed. After technical changes had been made, we carried out a second air quality check, the results of which are available for asbestos. The second check did not reveal any more asbestos fibres, suggesting that they had been brought in from outside, or could well have been. We are quite certain that asbestos was not used to construct the building.
Furthermore, a second check has been carried out for the ducts contaminated with legionella bacteria, but the results of this are not available yet for purely technical reasons, as well as biological reasons, because the cultures take about a fortnight to mature. At any rate, the results of this second check will be available by the start of the next part-session in Strasbourg, and rest assured, ladies and gentlemen, that if they should be positive, i.e. if these pathogenic elements are found to be still present, then the College of Quaestors will advise the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents to take the necessary action.
There is therefore no cause for alarm at present. We shall wait for the results of these checks and we shall take the necessary steps in accordance with the precautionary principle.
Madam President, in Item 5 of the Minutes of yesterday' s sitting on the withdrawal of Mr Le Pen' s mandate, there are two half truths in the references to my speech and to that of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and two half truths can add up to one untruth.
Firstly, the Minutes state that Mr Medina Ortega 'questioned whether the letter from the committee' s chairman truly reflected the opinion of the committee as a whole' . What I said was that the letter read out by the President and sent by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi was not the opinion of the committee. It had not been adopted by the committee and therefore was not its opinion. It is not a question of whether or not it reflected the committee' s opinion: reflecting an opinion is not the same as being an actual opinion.
Secondly, the Minutes then state that Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 'confirmed that the letter faithfully reflected the committee' s position' . Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi is not here but, if I remember rightly, what she said was something along the lines of it being her opinion of what had taken place in committee, although it had not been adopted by the committee. Although I am aware that I am splitting hairs here, I should like to make it clear that what I said was that it was not the committee' s opinion and that, in some way, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi acknowledged that it was her opinion of what happened in committee.
In this way, the two half truths could be turned into two complete truths.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 19 May 2000.
We are very sad to hear of the death of Mrs Adelaide Aglietta on 20 May 2000 in Rome. We all remember that throughout her intense political activity Mrs Aglietta was the political secretary of the Italian Radical Party. She was Co-President of the Group of the Greens between 1990 and 1994. She was tireless in leading a number of campaigns, particularly those promoting a federal Europe and human rights.
Mrs Adelaide Aglietta was a very courageous woman. In the first place, she had the courage of her convictions and argued passionately in favour of them, but always with respect for the other party. In spite of her long illness, she continued to pursue her political and parliamentary activities working tirelessly on her report on comitology and stubbornly continuing negotiations with the Commission and the Council until May 1999. I may say that, for all of us, she will continue to be a model of courage and dedication to Parliament and to Europe, and I therefore ask you to observe a minute' s silence in her memory.
Ladies and gentlemen, since our last part-session, the European Union has been hit by blind and brutal terrorism once again: in Greece, with the murder of Brigadier Stephen Saunders, military attach at the British Embassy, killed by the terrorist group 'November 17' and in Spain, with the murder of Jesus Maria Pedrosa, a municipal councillor in the Basque Country. In this way, for the third time in a few months, terrorism has once again attempted to silence the people in this region who continue to fight by democratic means to defend their freedom of expression and to work to promote the right to live in peace.
On the very day that these murders occurred, I felt bound, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament, to express our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the families of the victims. I also assured the governments concerned of our utmost support in their fight against terrorism.
I am about to propose a minute' s silence as a tribute to the two victims but, as a stronger expression of our solidarity, I should like to tell you that I am quite prepared, if the Spanish authorities and the Spanish Members of the House deem it useful and appropriate, to visit the Basque Country to convey the constant message of this unanimous House, which is our utter condemnation of terrorism and our disgust at these barbarous and cowardly acts, and our support for all those who fight courageously, at the risk of their own lives, to ensure that peace and democracy finally triumph in the Spanish Basque Country.
Madam President, I believe we must take good note of the fact that a representative of Euskal Herritarrok has expressed his regret at the murder of an honourable local councillor in the Basque Country. All that remains in this case is for him to also condemn political methods such as shooting people in the back or in the back of the neck, because, Madam President, the Spanish Basque Country, which has the greatest degree of self-government of any Autonomous Region in the European Union, is unfortunately the only place in the European Union where this barbaric and condemnable political method still persists.
Madam President, on a point of order, on behalf of Euskal Herritarrok I would like to express my regrets at the death of Jess Mara Pedrosa. We should like to show our solidarity with the family and friends of the deceased. Once again political confrontation shows its most dreadful aspect. We are witnessing tragic moments, in human and political terms, that demand of all of us not to fall into uselessly reiterated condemnations which do not offer anything in the search for solutions.
We should remember that Nelson Mandela, winner of the Nobel Prize and of the Sakharov Prize, was imprisoned for 27 years because he refused to condemn the violent actions of the ANC. The leaders of Sinn Fein have never condemned the IRA's violence. This clear attitude has permitted a political breakthrough to a definitive settlement in the bloody conflicts in South Africa and Northern Ireland.
We in Euskal Herritarrok will stick to our commitment to work together with all those eager to find a democratic solution to the ongoing conflict in the Basque country. Could we in this Parliament at last look for something new that will help a political dialogue in the Basque country, something similar to the Downing Street Declaration?
Madam President, I am grateful for your political will and for your willingness to go to the Basque Country so that the European Parliament' s anti-terrorist commitment may be clearly demonstrated to the Spanish, and particularly the Basque, public.
On the other hand, I believe that the words of the MEP from Euskal Herritarrok are a disgrace.
The MEP in question has no right to class himself alongside Mandela. Nelson Mandela deserves a different kind of respect. We heard Mandela in the European Parliament. He fought against violence and represented the legitimate interests of his people. The legitimate interests of the Basque people are represented by the people who have been democratically elected. I must tell the whole of Parliament, as Mr Barn Crespo has already done, that Mr Gorostiaga' s party sometimes goes as far as to regret the deaths caused by terrorists, perhaps because it has no choice, but it does not condemn them. This attitude has even led the democratic nationalist parties to break municipal coalitions with Euskal Herritarrok because it is not possible to accept and comprehend the shot in the back and continual violence as political methods.
Words are insufficient when it comes to condemning not only the murderers, but also those who give them political support.
Madam President, I would also like to add my voice to those who this morning do not wish the current conflict in the Basque Country to be misinterpreted, because, Madam President, words are also lethal weapons and also lead to deaths in the Basque Country. There must be no such ambiguity, when it comes to analysing death, in a forum such as the European Parliament, which is the temple of democracy.
Madam President, you will be very welcome in the Basque Country. You will speak for the enormous majority of this House, because the enormous majority of the Basque people are against those people who, while claiming to speak for the Basque people, ride rough-shod over freedoms and fundamental rights. Mr Gorostiaga represents nobody but that minority which, showing a complete disregard for the best European democratic traditions, tramples upon fundamental rights.
Madam President, go to the Basque Country, speak for us and show that we are crying out - hopefully not in the wilderness - for this to be the final death.
Madam President, I would like to thank you for your words of condemnation and condolence. Of course, we also very much welcome the fact that you are prepared to visit the Basque Country.
Before we start with the order of business, there are still a number of points of order.
Mr President, with regret I have to inform the House of the arrest yesterday in Moscow of Vladimir Alexandrovich Gusinsky, chief executive of the Most-Media group of television, radio and newspaper outlets.
Mr Gusinsky is a leading Russian community leader, being chairman of the Russian Jewish Congress and deputy chairman of the World Jewish Congress. This morning he is in what is known as a general purpose cell in Butyrsky prison where conditions are such that they must be left to your imagination. Mr Gusinsky's media activities were the only ones permitted to criticise Mr Putin and his government. His independent television is the only one that questions the behaviour of Russian troops in Chechnya. His programme Dolls, based on Britain's Spitting Image, satirises the President, something which supposedly causes him great irritation. His radio station Moscow Echo was selected by President Clinton a few days ago for the only substantive interview that he gave to a Russian outlet.
On 11 May Mr Gusinsky's places of work were raided by so-called tax police - men in ski masks and camouflage outfits carrying Kalashnikov rifles. There are few Russians who do not see a connection between Gusinsky's criticisms and the heavy-handed treatment now being meted out to him. Now we have this arrest and Mr Putin says he knows nothing about it.
This latest event leaves Russia teetering on the brink. Either Mr Putin backs down and releases Mr Gusinsky, or we shall have to conclude that Russia's brave attempt to establish a free press has turned out a failure and their democracy an illusion. The consequences of this will be devastating. It will mean goodbye Council of Europe, goodbye Partnership for Peace, farewell Tacis and a warm welcome to a new arms race. The European Parliament must do what it can to avert this catastrophe. I ask you, Mr President, to confer with your colleagues so that the whole range of EU-Russia relations can be investigated, debated and our influence brought to bear not least on the turbulent Mr Putin, who is putting us all in danger.
Thank you. As you can hear from the applause, the House has taken note of your comment.
- (NL) Mr President, I would like to bring up another point. Not only yesterday, but also a few months ago, every month really, permits are granted to the presidency or other nationalities to organise receptions. These then degenerate into all-out bingeing sessions, at which point the cameras start to roll. I think, Mr President, that that is unworthy of Parliament.
What I would like to ask through you is that these kinds of festivity be regulated properly. I think that we can no longer afford this kind of behaviour. I am surprised that permission is granted for this kind of thing, because my request to set up an exhibition for the handicapped, organised by myself, was turned down last week by the same College of Quaestors. My request was looked upon critically, whereas these kinds of party, where we are portrayed as vultures, are simply tolerated. I would ask you to raise this matter with the College of Quaestors in order to put a stop to this, as this is beneath us all.
Madam, please be so kind as to file your concern in writing with the Quaestors, who will then take the necessary steps.
Mr President, I have been studying yesterday' s Minutes and I have noted that Elmar Brok, MEP, has not mentioned that there might be grounds for his disqualification when voting on the report on digital television, although he has indicated in the register containing information on Members' secondary occupations that he is senior vice-president in a company called 'Media Developments Bertelsmann' . In my opinion, this matter should be discussed in Parliament.
I have not quite understood the honourable member. Are you saying that he did or did not vote? According to the translation, he did not vote and if he did not vote on a matter which is pertinent, then he behaved correctly.
Mr President, I have been reading the Minutes and it does not say here that he would not have voted.
Mr President, I have taken the floor simply to tell you that I have been in contact with Mr Murphy, the rapporteur of this report, and we have agreed that it would be better to proceed to the vote without debating the report.
Madam President, the Austrian political scientist and professor, Anton Pelinka, has been prosecuted following a comment he made about Mr Haider. Mr Pelinka was member of the committee of the European Observatory for Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna. According to treaty obligations, he should be receiving support from the Austrian Government, but despite repeated requests, he has received inadequate support in terms of infrastructure. In a press release, Mr Schssel stated that, in the light of these experiences, the treaty stipulations are pitched far too high. Mr Pelinka resigned because he felt unsupported by the government and was replaced by a member of one of the parties in government.
I know that the President has always been very committed to the issue of combating racism and xenophobia. I was there when she gave her speech in Vienna to mark the opening of the Observatory. We are also responsible for the functioning of the European institutions. I would like to ask you whether you are prepared to write a letter or contact the Austrian Government to express your concern about the restriction of the freedom of expression and to point out the obligations which the government has in this respect and which it cannot escape unilaterally.
Thank you, Mrs Buitenweg. We are investigating the matter you have just told us about very carefully.
Madam President, yesterday, the European Parliament decided by democratic majority no longer to convene in Strasbourg on Fridays. You subsequently issued a press release in which you expressed your regret about this. You have, of course, every right to do so. Everyone has their own personal and political responsibility. It is, however, somewhat confusing if the President of the European Parliament expresses regret regarding one of Parliament' s democratic decisions and if she does so on Parliament' s official letter-headed paper, with a reference to the services of Parliament. I would ask you not to cause any confusion when you have to carry out your personal responsibilities vis--vis your electorate - which is something we all understand - and to do so on your own letter-headed paper.
Mrs Van der Laan, you will agree that even when entrusted with the office of President of the European Parliament, we remain free politicians. I was speaking personally. I said that, personally, I regretted that vote, I understood the practical reasons which led to it and, with the Conference of Presidents, I would consider the best way of dealing with that vote, in the interests of this House. I do not think I abused my position.
Madam President, I would like to make you aware of something very inconvenient which happened to me which, in my opinion, undermines the dignity of the Members of this Parliament.
On Tuesday afternoon, I went to Poland to take part in an international conference. At the Grlitz border post, as can happen, the German police expressed doubts as to my identity. In order to convince the police and improve the situation I produced my European Parliament pass. At this point, the German police thought that the document was a fake and detained me for eight hours until, after intense discussion, the necessary clarification had been obtained. I had to spend eight hours under surveillance in a room and I was not allowed to use a telephone.
It was only after the intervention of the Polish authorities, who, moreover, recognised the validity of the document - and this bodes well for enlargement - that I was allowed to continue my journey. I will submit a more detailed description of the incident shortly, but, for the time being, I would be very grateful if you could make the German authorities aware of the problem. Border police need to be aware of the existence and function of this document.
Mr Mauro, what happened to you is totally unacceptable. Please let me have a note as soon as possible so that I can take it up with the authorities concerned. It is all the more unacceptable because it is clearly stated on that document, that passport, that it must be recognised by the authorities of European Union countries. It really is absolutely unacceptable. We will try to put an end to it.
Madam President, the trouble with this pass is that nobody knows about it! We make virtually no use of it at all. That is why I think you should remind the authorities once again that this pass is valid within the EU. Yesterday, Mrs Karamanou said that she wanted to travel to America on it, which is of course impossible. It clearly states in the pass that it is only valid within the European Union. But to prevent this sort of thing reoccurring, perhaps the German authorities, and also of the authorities in other countries, should be made aware of its validity.
Mrs Pack is quite right. If we want to prevent such incidents recurring, a teaching initiative in fact needs to be taken, so that everyone knows exactly what it is all about.
Madam President, I would not want Members of this House to think that I do not have a sense of humour. I did refer yesterday to the man or woman dressed as a cigarette packet standing outside this Chamber. But I was making a serious point and maybe yesterday it was taken rather too lightheartedly.
I have a letter from you, Madam President, dated 6 April, in which it was agreed by the College of Quaestors that the area around the Chambers in Brussels and Strasbourg should be regarded as a neutral zone in which demonstrations, exhibitions or similar activities intended to influence Members would not be tolerated. You went on to say that you would investigate ways of ensuring that there would be no recurrence. I hope that you and the College of Quaestors will take this seriously because it is an encroachment on the right of Members to come to this House and vote freely on issues that their electors have sent them here to debate. The jobs of one thousand people in my constituency are now at risk as a result of the decisions that were taken here yesterday.
Mr Perry, I can assure you that the Quaestors and I will take this very seriously and will take action to prevent a recurrence.
Mr President, on a point of order. I understand that the first point of order ever raised in the directly-elected Parliament in 1979 was by the Reverend Doctor Ian Paisley and his point was that the British flag was flying upside-down. Twenty-one years later I have to tell you that yesterday evening in the forecourt in front of the Tower building, where the motorcyclists were collecting, there were sixteen flags flying. Fifteen of them were the right way up but the Union flag was upside-down. To fly the Union flag upside-down is an internationally recognised distress signal and to fly it upside-down when it is not a distress signal is a gross affront to the flag, the British people and the British nation.
I have corresponded with the President of our Parliament on this issue and she has written to me assuring me that this matter would be corrected and that the British flag would be flown the right way up. Can I now call upon you first of all to ensure that the flag is immediately placed the right way up and also to take measures to ensure that in future it is always displayed correctly.
I can assure you, Mr Helmer, that everything will be done to ensure that the prestige of your flag is restored.
Mr President, I have news for Mr Helmer, which should encourage him. He should be grateful that we see our Union flag up at all. I am advised that it is the most popular flag to be stolen in this place.
Mr President, last year, the majority of MEPs in this House voted in favour of Friday morning sittings. Recently, however, a certain number of MEPs have, here in Strasbourg, attempted to prevent other MEPs from working during these sittings: I denounce this very undemocratic attitude, especially as those who did not want others to work were still receiving their per diem.
I should also like to say this. We have recently taken a further decision and, from next year, there will no longer be a sitting on Friday mornings. I have received an e-mail from a Dutch MEP, however, saying the following, in English, and I quote,
"If these amendments" , that is to say, for there not to be a sitting on a Friday, "are adopted and under the existing rules Members who cannot travel back to their home country on Thursday evening will still be able to sign the attendance register on Friday" .
(FR) Mr President, I think it is scandalous that MEPs are encouraged to stay here on Friday mornings anyway, in order to sign the register and to accept payment without doing any work, and I hope Parliament will have the courage to alter the existing rules.
Mr Goebbels, I would ask you not to reopen the debate and to go easy on me, since I am myself an endangered species in my capacity as President of the Friday morning session in Strasbourg.
Mr President, I should like to return once again to the fax, which Mr Van Hulten made available to all of us before the vote, and which concerns the issue of whether sittings should continue to be held on Fridays. This is not just about participating in plenary sittings; there are other tasks which need to be dealt with in this regard as well. We will now have to deal with these matters at home. There are, however, no attendance allowances for working at home. But since we have been promised these allowances in Mr Van Hulten' s letter, in the coming year I will be claiming the lost allowances from him.
I call on all colleagues to do likewise. Mr Van Hulten had better start saving up now!
Mr President, in its wisdom, the House has made a decision on Friday sittings. I should like to suggest that those responsible ensure that, even if no sittings are held on a Friday, official cars are still made available, because there will be many Members who will, in any case, wish to make full use of the Thursday here and who will need to have some way of reaching the airport or the railway station on the Friday.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 16 June 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is with great sadness that we learnt, last Tuesday, of the death of President Pierre Pflimlin, the former President of the European Parliament.
Pierre Pflimlin was a true statesman. His career in public office began immediately following the war and took him to the offices of Council President and Head of Government in 1958 at a time when France was experiencing one of the most unsettled periods of its history, when he eased the transition period with General de Gaulle. He played an active part in framing the constitution of the Fifth Republic and became a government minister, holding this position until 1962.
Pierre Pflimlin belonged to that historic generation of Europeans who, since the end of the war, as a member of parliament, a minister and a political activist, was at the forefront of all the efforts to build a strong and reunited Europe. As an native of Alsace and of Strasbourg and a friend and comrade of Robert Schuman, he was one of the most ardent proponents of reconciliation between France and Germany, and a powerful symbol of French-German friendship. He saw this reconciliation that he had worked so hard to achieve, as he confided to the Bishop of Strasbourg, as an absolute miracle. He knew, nonetheless, that this miracle was not a random event, but rather the outcome of proactive and constructive commitment, based on common objectives and efficient institutions.
In 1959, Pierre Pflimlin joined the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and in 1963 began a three-year term as President. Around the same time he became a Member of the European Parliament (1962-1967) before returning in 1979 at the first elections by universal suffrage. He was elected First Vice-President in 1982 and was President from 1984 to 1987.
During his presidency, the European Parliament established a key role for itself, especially in its budgetary capacity, and increased its standing in Europe and internationally, since Pierre Pflimlin had the honour of welcoming to Parliament the President of the United States, Ronald Reagan, and other distinguished guests.
With reference to Altiero Spinelli' s Draft Treaty establishing the European Union, he strenuously urged treaty reform by the Single European Act, while at the same time decrying its shortcomings in terms of the inadequate powers accorded the European Parliament. He committed Parliament to taking advantage of his friendly rapport with Commission President Jacques Delors, advocating tripartite meetings with the Council and the Commission, an early form of conciliation.
For Pierre Pflimlin was also a man of dialogue. Confident in his choices, he respected the opinions of his political opponents, and always put the higher interests of Europe before ideological considerations.
Strasbourg, where he was mayor for twenty four years, represented for him the symbol of this opening up, the visible sign of French-German reconciliation and a sign of hope and confidence in the future of Europe. He therefore put a great deal of sincere effort into developing his city and its role as European capital, creating real estate infrastructures and developing a genuine policy of welcoming visitors.
Pierre Pflimlin left the European Parliament in 1989, but for many Europeans, especially young people, he remained an authoritative voice, someone who could generate enthusiasm for the political objective of building Europe.
Until the end President Pflimlin impressed us with the vigour and clarity of his message, which is still highly relevant to us all. Let me once again, on behalf of the European Parliament, express our deepest sympathy to the family of Pierre Pflimlin, especially his daughter who is attending our sitting at this very moment.
It was under Pierre Pflimlin' s presidency, in 1986, that the European flag and anthem were adopted as symbols of the European Union. I shall therefore ask you to please agree to rise while we play the European anthem in memory of President Pflimlin.
Several days ago, ladies and gentlemen, 58 illegal immigrants tragically died in a lorry at the British border. This was on 18 June. The tragic deaths of these men and women who, like the two young Guinean men who died last year in the landing gear of a European plane, were investing their every hope in Europe, cannot fail to move us deeply.
Every one of us was, I am sure, outraged at this tragedy, and I am sure that we are all agreed that the European Union should step up its fight against this sort of modern-day slavery. We must take every possible action to dismantle this 'industry' dealing in death. The European Union must respond immediately, encompassing a genuine common immigration policy as well as the redefinition of North-South relations, involving aid to economic development and access to know-how as a priority.
The Treaty of Amsterdam has been in force for one year and the European Council at Tampere was held six months ago. The legal bases for action are in place. All we need is genuine political will. Action must be taken now. This is why the Council Presidency and the European Commission will, at your request, be discussing this matter before Parliament tomorrow afternoon.
Madam President, on a point of order, I have here a report which appeared in the British newspaper The Independent concerning a meeting which appears to have taken place between yourself and Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. According to this report, you left the meeting and then briefed the press on Her Majesty's political opinions. This has caused a certain amount of concern and distress in political circles in the UK, because as, I am sure you know, the protocol of such meetings is that they are private and should not be commented on.
I would like to give you this opportunity to let us know what you understood the protocol of that meeting to be, and perhaps also to clarify what you said to the press afterwards.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me assure you that I gave no such press conference after leaving my meeting with Her Majesty. I can, however, tell you that the euro was the focus of all my discussions with the authorities I met, and that they all showed great interest in this question.
Mr President, I speak on yesterday's Minutes and something which is not in them. Yesterday evening I raised two points. One was on the success of Euro 2000. The second one was on whether or not Mr Helmer joined with me in congratulating Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on welcoming the introduction of the euro into the UK. I do not see that minuted. Could you change that please?
Mr President, there was a very large number of MEPs who could not be here yesterday because we were let down by the flight connections. I can inform you that 25 Scandinavian MEPs and interpreters took between 10 and 20 hours to arrive here in Strasbourg. I hope you will convey this to our French President and tell her that our having to meet here in Strasbourg is almost intolerable and a constant strain. I would also ask the President to contact Air France, which is about to take over the carrier which cancelled its flight to Strasbourg yesterday. I would ask her to urge Air France to retain the route and to operate it punctually so that we might avoid these constant problems in connection with our meetings. It would be best, of course, if we did not have to come to Strasbourg at all, but that is an entirely different matter.
Mr Haarder, I shall of course take note of your comments. I think that in most of your cases you must also have seen that a survey is being carried out by the French Government, specifically asking you to say what problems you have in getting to Strasbourg by air.
I am aware that many Members of Parliament had problems yesterday, but let me point out that when I am in the chair I am no longer French but European.
Mr President, I would like to take up this issue. Many people were unable to get here on time because of air traffic problems. I actually managed to, but I did not even find a list to sign, so I hope that this will be recorded in today' s Minutes.
Mr President, I was on the flight concerned yesterday. It took me 12 hours to get to Strasbourg. What is more, I also had problems obtaining a seat at all on a flight to Strasbourg. It is quite unacceptable for MEPs to have to spend time which should be devoted to political work or to their electorate at home on wondering how they will manage to get to their place of work and also on working out where they are going to spend the night. MEPs who are not so lucky as to win the lottery here in Strasbourg and to have permanent hotel rooms have, on each occasion, to ponder such matters as where they are going to sleep and how they are going to get a room at their hotel in town. We need some orderly arrangements if this Parliament is to continue. I address you as a Frenchman - even though I appreciate that your nationality has nothing to do with your role as President - for the EU has a French Presidency now, of course, and, as far as I know, it is in France' s interests for the Parliament to remain in Strasbourg. I would request that the President of France be informed of the impossible working conditions to which we are exposed because Parliament meets in Strasbourg.
Mr President, I just want to say that, after 11 years as an MEP, I am familiar with the French airline concerned. For that reason, I chose another and arrived on time.
Mr President, I understand our Danish colleagues' concern about this air traffic problem. Yesterday was quite catastrophic, but I would remind you all at the same time that when the Danes' problems started, I myself had already been travelling for five hours on my way to Strasbourg. I took the shortest route possible from a European capital to Strasbourg via another European capital, and the journey took fourteen hours. I have always cast my vote in favour of Strasbourg' s special status, including on Friday. But things cannot go on like this. I am gradually coming round to the opinion that we must assemble in Brussels, which does not take fourteen hours to reach.
Ladies and gentlemen, your comments are completely justified, and will be passed on to the relevant departments.
I can see the requests to speak piling up on my desk. I hope your points are not just to do with problems of air travel to Strasbourg, as we have a lot of work on this morning.
Mr President, this is nothing to do with aeroplanes, although I could speak about flights if you wished me to.
I want to refer partly to a point of order and partly to yesterday's Minutes. As you will recall, the first thirteen items of yesterday's agenda took the best part of an hour to get through. We then had the privilege of the Prime Minister of Portugal speaking. At the moment the Prime Minister spoke about half the Chamber got up to walk out. This may have been because they had other meetings, or whatever, but it is a gross discourtesy for people to walk out when the Prime Minister is speaking. I would ask you to ask the political groups and Parliament to try to ensure that when there are heads of state or prime ministers speaking in this Parliament there are not other meetings happening at the same time, which give people the opportunity to walk out.
Your comments will be passed on to the leaders of the political groups and we will have an opportunity, in a few moments' time, to see if the message has been received.
. (EL) Mr President, I see from the Minutes that the question and answer exchange during question time with Minister Moscovici has been wrongly recorded.
The Minutes state, on page 14, in the Greek version at least: "Question 16 by Mr arinos: Violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter-planes. Mr Moscovici replied to the question and to Mr Marino's supplementary question and Mr Zacharakis then intervened" .
I should like to point out that in the morning the President of the French Republic, Mr Chirac, gave the impression, by appearing here in person and from what he said in his speech, that under the French presidency there would be closer, more systematic cooperation between the European Parliament and the presidency; however, in the afternoon, the first minister of the presidency to appear and work with us, the former MEP Mr Moscovici, did exactly the opposite. Apart from the fact that he was curt with us, he gave I think almost all my fellow members more or less one-word replies or claimed that he had replied, although he did indeed reply to the written question which I had submitted. But when I then submitted a second question as a result of yesterday morning's debate on the incursion of the Turkish occupying army into another part of Cyprus, instead of replying on the issue which I had put to him, he said "I have already replied" . Mr Zacharakis then intervened with two questions and Mr Moscovici barely bothered to stand up and did not bother to reply.
I should like to ask, first, if a minister or commissioner questioned here is able not only to refuse to reply but to do so in a completely disdainful manner and if we are supposed to take "I have already replied" as an answer, when they have not done so. The same happened to other fellow members who, if they are present here, can confirm this. I should like a reply on this and I should like the Minutes to be corrected.
Mr Marinos, we have taken note of your view here and it will also be included in the Minutes. It is true that it would be opportune to review the Question Time procedures from time to time. I shall look into this.
I too should like to request that the Minutes be corrected because, as they stand, they are not an accurate record of what happened during the sitting.
I should like the Minutes to record that I submitted two specific questions to Mr Moscovici and that he did not reply. Of course, following on from what Mr arinos said and over and above the disdainful manner adopted by Mr Moscovici, who failed to honour traditional French courtesy, even though Parliament is sitting on French territory, what I note and conclude from his silence, and it would be a good idea to bring this to the attention of the Greek Government, is that the French Government secretly intends to oppose the accession of Cyprus to the European Union and to promote the accession of Turkey, even if it does violate human rights and the basic principles of international law.
Mr Zacharakis, we will not be holding the political debate on this issue here. Mr Moscovici took the floor yesterday and we will check whether this was included correctly in the Minutes.
Mr President, I wish to raise once again the point I raised on Monday and again yesterday with regard to Mr Helmer's comments in this House. Can I say that I am surprised that on two occasions now I have asked Mr Helmer to comment on the item about the Queen of the United Kingdom supporting the euro, and so far he has failed to do. Can I say to this House that I understand this must be the first time that Mr Helmer has been speechless.
Mr President, according to our information, Mrs Stauner withdrew the explanatory statement in the relevant committee yesterday, but despite that, it has been distributed today. I would just like to ask you, Mr President, to establish if this statement was withdrawn by the rapporteur or not. If it was, then it should not be distributed as an official document.
I shall enquire at the services into the exact course of events.
The fact of the matter is that yesterday evening, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, I withdrew this explanatory statement. I asked the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control to draft a letter to that effect. Because we were sitting in the evening, that was no longer possible. I assume that if I go to my office now, I will find the letter there and can sign it so that we can proceed accordingly.
Mr President, I wanted to bring up an issue which should be of great concern to this Parliament, and in particular to Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control.
A serious abuse of European law and the Statute of the European Investment Bank is taking place in my own country. Member States are not authorised under EC law to propose or nominate their own nationals directly to the Board of Governors for the position of Vice-President of the EIB, and to do so is a clear violation of the Statute of the European Investment Bank. The task of making the nominations and appointment is reserved exclusively to a Board of Directors of the Bank, which is a quite separate body.
The situation in Ireland is quite contrary to this principle. The Irish government have, in contravention of the law, nominated a person who not only has no experience of economic or financial affairs, but is furthermore a disgraced supreme court judge who was forced to resign before he was impeached by the Irish parliament. This issue is now before the courts in Ireland.
This is an extremely important matter for this Parliament, which is concerned because the European Union provides Guarantee Funds to the EIB. Parliament must take notice of this, because if we allow Member States to contravene the law in this way it has serious implications for the European Union as a whole. I would ask the President if he could instruct the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control to look into this issue, because it should be dealt with very quickly. It could set a very bad precedent for the future for other Member States and for nominations to this body.
Mr President, on Monday I made a point of order about President Nicole Fontaine's reported comments in the British press regarding her recent visit with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. A British Labour Member of this House, Mr Miller, repeated what were purported to be the Queen's remarks, not once but three times, on Monday, on Tuesday and on Wednesday. He sought to drag the Queen into a political controversy and to use her name to score cheap political points.
Mr President, it may be that President Fontaine was unfamiliar with the British rules of protocol which obtain in such matters, but Mr Miller has no such excuse. He knows perfectly well that ours is a non-political Head of State. He knows perfectly well that for nearly fifty years she has scrupulously avoided engaging in controversial political issues. He knows perfectly well that she cannot come to this House to set the record straight. His behaviour is a disgrace and a scandal.
Mr President, I am proud to be British but today I am ashamed to share my nationality with that man. Has he no shame? Has he no respect? Has he no decency or honour at all?
Mr President, well, how can I respond to such an attack as that? When I raised the point on Monday, and on Tuesday, and on Wednesday, I asked Mr Helmer for his comments on the euro. So far, he has refused to comment. Can I also say that when Mrs Fontaine spoke to Her Majesty the Queen and obviously put certain questions to her the Queen, in her response, was representing her government, which is a Labour Government. That might not suit Mr Helmer, but I am sorry to say that is the way it goes.
Can I also say yes, I am Scottish, yes, I am British, but, Mr Helmer, I am European as well and proud to be.
Mr President, I wish to use this point of order to speak in my capacity as chairman of the delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico. As you will be aware, elections were held in Mexico last Sunday. Yesterday the delegation which I chair met and discussed a report drawn up by our fellow Members who had been to Mexico to act as observers at these elections on behalf of this Parliament.
We finally approved a three-point statement. The first point was to recognise and welcome the dignified and civic-minded conduct of our Mexican friends during these elections. Secondly, we welcomed the election of Mr Fox and expressed our hope that relations between the European Union and Mexico would continue to make progress under the general agreement approved and ratified in March. Thirdly, we wished to congratulate President Zedillo on having enabled Mexican institutions to make this change to democracy.
Mr President, I would ask you to see if the President of this Parliament could forward our resolution, the complete text of which you will receive today, to the Mexican authorities.
Very well, Mr Seguro. I will certainly inform President Fontaine.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want to draw your attention to something really annoying in connection with the Minutes. The "Texts Adopted" also form part of the Minutes. I pointed out yesterday during the vote on the directive to combat money laundering the English translation of Article 6(3) needs to be corrected to bring it in line with Amendment No 26, because the English translation is wrong. In the middle of the second paragraph of the English version there is only a reference to representation in legal proceedings, but no reference to legal consultants, as there is in the German text. That is a key point in this directive and since the Council working group is working on the basis of the English text it is quite crucial to correct this text. I had already complained about this in committee vis  vis the language services. At the time the committee decided not to table an amendment because the German text is the original version, as drafted by the rapporteur. I complained about this yesterday - the situation was not remedied - and today is the third time I am complaining about it! I do think the services of this House should work more carefully on such key questions and it really is intolerable that despite my criticism yesterday the Minutes have got the text wrong again! I would ask you get to the bottom of this matter, to sort out this most important aspect of the directive and to please correct this in the English translation!
Certainly, Mr Lehne. You gave ample clarification of the matter yesterday. We will certainly ensure that the necessary correction is made.
Mr President, yesterday we received a communication on yellow paper from the vice-president, with some nuts attached to it. This note was about supporting the export of products from Vanuatu, a developing country in the Pacific. I think that is a very good idea and quite right. And I am quite happy to support it. But what rather puzzles me is that in it the vice-president quite explicitly stated that it is illegal to import these nuts into the European Union. So I must ask this vice-president to explain how these nuts came to be illegally imported, since it was he who delivered them to us! That in itself is a contradiction so would he please clarify the matter.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have the great pleasure of welcoming the members of the delegation from the Swiss Federal Assembly, led by their speaker, Mr Marcel Sandoz, now seated in the official gallery.
The members of the delegation have come to Strasbourg to meet their European Parliament peers on the occasion of the 19th EU-Switzerland Interparliamentary Conference. The meetings commenced yesterday and will continue throughout today. The agenda includes the bilateral agreements between the European Parliament and Switzerland, the future development of the Swiss integration policy, the likely results of the European Union Intergovernmental Conference and the enlargement process of the European Union.
On behalf of all the Members of the European Parliament, I hope that the meetings will be profitable for the delegation and I wish them a pleasant stay in this beautiful town of Strasbourg.
Ladies and gentlemen, first of all I must inform you that it has not yet been possible to make available all of the language versions of the Minutes. The approval of the Minutes for yesterday' s sitting is therefore postponed until all the versions are available.
The reason for the delay is that we have more than 200 pages of roll-call votes, which have cost Parliament' s budget the modest sum of BEF 4 million. We are therefore currently producing the remaining versions. I hope that all the groups will bear in mind how much requests for roll-call votes cost Parliament' s budget. Therefore, when we have the remaining versions we will proceed with the approval of the Minutes.
Mr President, on a point of order I should like to draw the attention of the House to a very serious incident which occurred yesterday in my constituency of Sunderland, in England. A fruit and vegetable wholesaler had his premises raided by police and trading standards officers, who seized the weighing equipment which he used to dispense his produce in the traditional British units of pounds and ounces. Apparently this is now in contravention of an EU directive, although there is a legal doubt about this.
I hope the President will join with me in condemning this extremely heavy-handed reaction and write to my constituent offering the full support of the House in his fight against this nonsense. If Members are wondering why the EU is so unpopular in the United Kingdom, it is because of incidents such as this.
Mr Callanan, I am extremely concerned about this very serious attack on British tradition, and it will be duly discussed. However, this was not, in my opinion, a point of order.
Mr President, I just wanted to say something about the Minutes, although it is not yet time for them to be approved. However, it might be possible to make a correction to them already. Yesterday, with Mr Karas' excellent report, I had intended to vote in favour of paragraph 5, a particularly good one. I accidentally voted against it. I would ask you to correct this.
Mr President, I should like to ask you to instruct the Security Service to investigate what has been going on. When I came into my office this morning, the door was open, even though I know for sure that I closed it last night, and my computer was switched on, even though I am quite certain that I switched it off last night. I think that what went on there last night must be investigated at any rate.
Mrs Gebhardt, this is a concern that I share, because exactly the same thing has been happening to me for two days. We will therefore notify our security services.
Mr President, I respect the fact that you cannot put the Minutes to the vote yet, but I would just like to comment on a matter which was raised yesterday. At the beginning of the topical and urgent debate, we had a discussion on the application of Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure, that is to say adjournment of a debate. The President declared this not applicable to the topical debate. I wonder how it is possible for a rule of the Rules of Procedure not to apply to a situation without it being further mentioned in the Rules of Procedure. Rule 146 was clearly cancelled out in that instance. I would therefore ask whether the Committee on the Rules of Procedure or the President could explain in what instances Rule 146 would apply. Yesterday' s incident caused a great deal of confusion.
Mr Maaten, Rule 50(6) stipulates that Rules 143, 144 and 146 shall not apply to those resolutions. This means that the president of the sitting strictly applied the Rules of Procedure.
Mr President, on the point that Mr Callanan raised a couple of moments ago, I suggest that instead of raising the matter with you he should raise it with the Queen of the United Kingdom as she seems to have an opinion on most European issues these days.
I have taken note of this peculiar point of order.
I would like to inform you that, as you are aware, yesterday a tragic road accident occurred in Spain, near Soria, in which 2 drivers and 25 teenagers died. The President has decided to send our condolences to the families and to the respective authorities. I think that this goes some way to satisfying the requests that were made during the debate yesterday.
Mr President, of course, the Catalan Members here today, such as yourself, Mr Gasliba and I, are particularly affected by this tragedy. Aside from the rightful decision by the President to send her condolences to the families of the victims, perhaps, Mr President, it would be helpful if that communication from the President urged all the authorities responsible for transport in the European Union once again to step up the application of legislation and the monitoring of safety conditions for the transport of both school children and pensioners, who have frequently been victims of such tragedies.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 7 July 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, once again it is my sad duty to open our plenary sitting against the background of the violence in the Spanish Basque Country which has intensified dramatically over the summer. A further seven victims have been murdered by an organisation whose strategy is clearly, henceforth, one of attempting to defeat democracy by the use of terror.
Let me give the names of the murder victims: Jos Mara Martin Carpena, a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga, whose widow and daughter are to visit the House tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.; Juan Mara Jauregui, the former Civil Governor of Guipuzcoa; Jos Maria Korta, president of the Guipuzcoa employers' association; Francisco Casanova, a Second Lieutenant in the Spanish army; Irene Fernndez Pereda and Jos Angel de Jesus Encinas, members of the Guardia Civil in Sallent de Gallego; Manuel Indiano, Popular Party municipal councillor in Zumarraga.
On each of these sad occasions, I expressed our solidarity with the victims. I have expressed our condemnation of these unspeakably barbaric acts. I have also offered the Spanish authorities our support.
Today, Parliament as a whole, unanimous in spite of the range of our political affiliations, is honouring their memory, affirming loudly and clearly that terrorism is the very antithesis of democracy. To deny the right to life is to kill liberty. Not only is violence a solution to be condemned, it is also inefficient, as it isolates and excludes the perpetrators of such actions.
I propose a minute' s silence as a last tribute to these victims, as an expression of our support for their families and friends and, indeed, to all democratic men and women in Spain, and particularly in the Spanish Basque Country, who, despite the climate of terror, continue to believe in political dialogue, the fundamental values of civilised society and the ultimate victory of democracy. Please stand and observe this minute' s silence.
- Madam President, unfortunately I cannot agree with what you have said. There is no truth except the whole truth. A part of reality is not sufficient by itself. The whole is the only real truth. This is much more than a metaphysical quotation from Hegel. We in Euskal Herritarrok also regret profoundly the loss of human lives and share with all Basque citizens the shocked feelings of our people at the moment.
Bertrand Russell denounced the obscenity of deliberately humiliating a nation, of making people crazy so that a straitjacket would be needed. This is actually the Spanish Government's strategy towards the Basque country. The action of ETA is a righteous expression of the struggle for recognition of something quite elementary.
Mr Gorostiaga Atxalandabaso, in view of the circumstances, I must say, personally, and this is perhaps not quite in keeping with my duties as President, that I find your contribution quite unacceptable here.
Addressing more particularly those Members of Parliament that were members of the previous legislature, it is my very sad duty to inform you of the deaths, this summer, of Vassilis Ephremidis and Staffan Burenstam Linder. Many of you will have very clear memories of their time with us, of their particularly dynamic presence, and I have taken the liberty of sending condolences to their families on behalf of the House as a whole, of course.
Madam President, on a point of order. In a letter I sent to you on 1 September, I referred to various allegations in the British Press about one Member of this House, Mr Hannan, and the fact that he is alleged to have raised over GBP 100 000 for the 'no' campaign in the Danish referendum on the euro. Could you launch an investigation into this matter to establish that Mr Hannan did not use Parliament premises or the staff to which he is entitled as a Member of this House to raise that money? Could you also ensure that Mr Hannan states the position in his declaration of financial interests in advance of the referendum in Denmark so that the citizens of that country can see where the money came from?
Mr Murphy, I note your statement. I have indeed received your letter, and I have forwarded it to the quaestors, who will see what action needs to be taken in response to it.
Madam President, could I ask you to invite colleagues, when they make declarations of that type, to assure themselves that the Member concerned has been informed of such a declaration? It is very discourteous to make that sort of remark, openly in the Chamber, when the Member concerned is not present.
Mr McMillan-Scott, the problem I have is that I never know what subject the Member is going to raise. In fact, that should really have been a procedural motion.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my great pleasure to welcome a group of municipal councillors from Malaga this morning. Our visitors include the wife and daughter of Jos Mara Martin Carpena, a Popular Party municipal councillor in Malaga, who was assassinated by ETA on 15 July.
Ladies, allow me to say that your presence with us here today illustrates your courage in coping with this horrendous experience, which was made all the more painful by your witnessing this heinous murder. In all sincerity, I can do no more than offer you our deepest sympathy.
Yesterday, as you know, this House paid its respects to the victims of terrorism in Spain and observed a minute' s silence in their memory. I would like you to know that you have the full support of the European Parliament in the fight to put an end to terrorism in Spain.
Madam President, we once again have cause to regret the fact that, in Europe, there are still people who murder others because they think differently and who burn down the houses of their political opponents. There are people who force many others to emigrate in order to save their lives and the lives of their families.
Faced with this, under the rule of law, we democrats can only unite to defend our system of freedom from the tyranny of terror and trust in judicial action. The most difficult thing is to explain to the widows and to the children who have been orphaned why their loved ones have been taken away. To you, Elvira, Mara Jos, we can only offer our deepest sympathy.
Madam President, once again you have shown yourself, through your words today and yesterday, to be worthy of your duties as a representative and as a human being, and I thank you on behalf of the Socialist Group. In fact, in an emotional tribute, we have just applauded one of the victims, Jos Mara Martn Carpena, whose life has been taken simply for having committed the crime of living and working in a peaceful and democratic country.
Every, or almost every, human being feels emotional and all democrats feel indignation, but I have a special reason to feel emotional in this case. For sixteen years I had the honour of being mayor of the city to which Martn Carpena dedicated his life and of presiding over the Council in which he worked. I understand very well what a great job all councillors do. In return for modest human, political and economic compensation, they give their time generously and dedicate their lives to the public good. That is how Martn Carpena won the affection of all the people of Malaga.
Madam President, as you know, and as we saw yesterday, there are groups in the Basque Country who support terrorism. Using Nazi rhetoric, they propose ethnic and political objectives for territories, which are currently Spanish and French, which surpass the Albania of the sixties. They wage their campaigns in the countries of the European Union.
I would like to remind Members that a political union based on democracy and human rights would not have allowed the terrorist totalitarianism of the 20s and 30s to emerge in Europe. Therefore, when all the social and communication institutions of Europe can react with the courage of this Parliament and when the fifteen different populations have the same attitude to ETA' s attacks, terrorism will be all but finished. On behalf of the Socialist Group then, Madam President, I would like to pay the warmest of tributes to the memory of Martn Carpena and also offer my best wishes to the family and colleagues of this murdered councillor.
Madam President, the presence of the group of councillors from Malaga and, in particular, the presence of the widow of Martn Carpena can help us to regain that sense of hope which ETA wants to stamp out. I believe that their presence is without doubt something which will allow us to believe that the Basque people can regain its capacity for dialogue and can return to peace.
It is clearly difficult for words to keep their value, despite the fact that we repeat them and that yesterday and today Parliament has adopted its position. It is important, however, that they continue to have value. The presence of these people must be reflected in our words and it is important that we speak out so that our words may be worthy of their courage and so that, in speaking and in adopting our position, we share their pain.
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party wishes to express its hope that peace may return to the Basque people.
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European United Left, I would also like to pay tribute to councillor Martn Carpena and express my admiration and gratitude to him, his family, his wife, his friends and, through them, to all the families of those people who, in the course of their duties, have lost their lives to terrorism.
I would like to say to his family and friends that his sacrifice has not been in vain and that they have been at the front line in the defence of democracy, through their bravery and courage, not only in the Basque Country and in Spain, but also in Europe. The front line of democracy must be defended democratically. We must bear in mind the enormous courage required in order, on behalf of the people, as representatives of the people, to defend democratic values every day, in at atmosphere of danger, coercion and threats. Not only have councillors been killed, but also members of the security forces and of democratic forces, social representatives, union representatives and businesspeople. It is particularly perverse, however, to kill, intimidate and pursue those individuals in whom the people have put their trust. There can be no greater contradiction. That is why all the political groups, in unison, are today reaffirming their commitment to the defence of democracy and thanking those friends and families of people like Martn Carpena for the example they set. This will commit us in the future to the fight for democracy and freedom. Please be assured that the sacrifice of Martn Carpena has not been in vain.
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I should like to echo your words of sympathy with, and admiration for, but especially of sympathy with, the relatives of Martin Carpena. Any assault within Europe involving innocent people is an assault on Europe itself, on its democratic values, on the belief that via democratic means, the necessary changes can yet be made in a peaceful and tolerant manner, thus enabling people to live happier lives in a structured society.
I therefore hope that all countries will join forces even more emphatically than in the past in order to find these paths of peace and dialogue and that nobody will try to seek political gain from such attacks. Mrs Carpena, relatives, friends and people from Malaga, as well as people from so many other places where the death toll has risen to more than a thousand, we feel for you and we should more than anything like to see an end to these acts of terrorism This is why we are opposed to polarisation. We invite all those who seek peaceful change to gather around the negotiating table.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East. As you know, today' s debate is rather special because it will be immediately followed by addresses by the Speakers of the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council who are here in Strasbourg and will be joining us in the gallery shortly. I shall welcome them once they are here and, as you know, they will be making their official speeches to the House at 11.30 a.m.
Madam President, President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by following you, Madam President, and the Speakers from the groups, in expressing the sympathy and sorrow of the Council, which condemns terrorism. This is an issue which we addressed at our informal meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Evian on Saturday and Sunday. I in turn wish to assure the inhabitants of Malaga and Mr Carpena' s widow of the European Union' s intention to fight on their behalf against the scourge of terrorism, which represents a real threat to our democracies.
You quite rightly decided, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, to address the question of the situation in the Middle East. This decision was all the more timely given that this region, which has been the scene of a number of particularly striking events over recent months, is approaching what may prove to be an historical watershed. What we in fact face is a turning point for the people of the region: for the first time there is a real possibility of an end to half a century of conflict between Israel and Palestine; but there is also a risk, if this hope is dashed, of a resurgence of violence.
The fact that the Speakers of the Knesset, Mr Avraham Burg and the Palestinian Legislative Council, Mr Ahmed Qurie, have agreed to come here together and address the European Parliament today at your invitation, Madam President, demonstrates the will for peace and dialogue which now drives both sides. I also see their, to my knowledge, unprecedented visit as a gesture of recognition of the European Union' s unceasing efforts to promote peace in the region, a recognition which is also accompanied by high expectations of Europe. We must live up to these expectations and this gesture, which I see as a sign of trust and hope, deserves to be welcomed.
I shall now endeavour to explain our analysis of recent developments and of the current state in the region and future prospects of the peace process.
Mr President, I would like to make what I consider to be a very important point. Yesterday, I came to Strasbourg on Olympic Airways flight 165 from Athens to Frankfurt. When the plane arrived at Frankfurt airport, it was immediately surrounded by German police. Nobody spoke anything but German, and we were not allowed to leave the plane without showing our passports to the German police. I remind you that Greece, as well as Germany and France, are countries that belong to the Schengen area.
The worst thing is that this was not an exception; this, I was told, is something that happens systematically at Frankfurt airport when planes arrive from Greece. As a Member of the European Parliament, where we have so often voted on Schengen, I believe that, although there is legislation for the free movement of people, the fact that, in reality, this legislation is being systematically violated by the German authorities is an insult to, and undermines, our work. As this concerns the free movement of Members of the European Union, I would like the President of the European Parliament to take the appropriate measures to ensure that we come to Strasbourg in a way that befits people who belong to the European Union and to Schengen.
Mr Alavanos, I consider that our President shall forward the text of your speech to the authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Frankfurt airport authorities so that - and I do not know what the grounds might be for the current practice - we receive at least some sort of explanation or, alternatively, this procedure, which, I agree with you, has very little to do with the Schengen provisions, ceases to be used.
Mr President, on Monday, in my absence and without any prior notification, Mr Murphy, the leader of the British Socialist Group, raised a question about my involvement in supporting the Danish anti-euro campaign. He was very careful not to accuse me of anything but has none the less contrived to give the impression that I am somehow under suspicion. I should like to put on record that my involvement with the Danish referendum has been entirely separate from my work in this House and that I have never infringed any parliamentary rules. Unlike the Danish "yes" campaign, the "no" campaign cannot rely on taxpayers' money or subsidies from the European Union.
It is outrageous that Mr Murphy should have sought to give the impression that I am under investigation when he has failed to produce evidence or even make any allegations against me. It cannot be right for Members to be subjected to this kind of baseless innuendo. I would ask you to insist that Mr Murphy either accuse me outright or apologise.
Mr Hannan, Mr Murphy is, of course, free to decide whether and how to respond to your speech.
Mr President, we very frequently complain about the Council's attitude towards Parliament. I would like to highlight an incident of a completely opposite nature which took place yesterday during the debate on EU external action priorities. We had the reports from the President of the Council and the Commissioner followed by a debate took place. At the end of the debate, due to the presidency's total lack of flexibility, the President of the Council and Commissioner Patten were not able to respond to the numerous questions which had arisen from quite an intense debate. Now then, I cannot understand this Parliament for complaining about the Council's behaviour. Yesterday, the President of the Council was in the Chamber from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. while the number of Members of Parliament present was not great - and, in actual fact, we prevented both the Council or the Commission from replying to extremely important questions posed by Members. This does not seem to me to be very polite, and I would go so far as to describe it as verging on the downright rude.
Mr Dupuis, I doubt that this situation was due to lack of flexibility on the part of the presidency on duty. It is more likely to have been a mistake, a misunderstanding between the Chair at the time and the Council and Commission representatives.
Mr President, I am very surprised at what I heard from our British fellow MEP, Mr Hannan, for he presented himself in the Danish media as a Member of the European Parliament. If he were there as a private individual, he should have let this be known in the Danish campaign. All things considered, I think Mr Hannan should stay at home in Britain and mind his own business, and leave us to get on with it in Denmark. We have no use for people like that acting the fool in Denmark.
Mr President, I do not want to detain the House too long but I think that Mr Hannan protests too much! I made a very simple request to the President on Monday. The President agreed to my request and referred the matter to the Quaestors. But while Mr Hannan is here in the Chamber this morning, perhaps he could give us a guarantee that he will be making a new entry in his declaration of financial interests to say where the money has come from. The Danish people have a right to know in advance of the referendum on 28 September where the "no" campaign funds have come from.
Now then, we cannot continue with the debate and we cannot turn this Chamber into an annex to the discussion leading up to the Danish referendum either. We now know the essence of the issue. Everyone will do what they think best.
The next item is the report (A5-0201/2000) by Mr Watson, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification [COM(1999) 638 - C50077/2000 - 1999/0258 (CNS)]
Mr President, I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Klamt, who was the original rapporteur designated by the committee which I have the honour to chair to look at this issue. Mrs Klamt did a very considerable amount of work on the proposal for a Council directive on the right to family reunification. She deserves the credit for the work that has been done. I wish to congratulate her on that.
I have inherited this particular cornucopia as chairman of the committee because Mrs Klamt felt at the end of the votes at committee stage that she could no longer support the text as it stood and therefore I am presenting it to the House today.
I would like to commend the European Commission on what is an extremely well argued and well presented report, drawn up in record time considering the relative lack of resources of the departments concerned and the demands laid down at the European Council in Tampere last year. The Commission has come forward with an excellent draft directive which will permit third-country nationals legally resident in a Member State of the Union to reside in another Member State as is required if a true area of freedom, security and justice is to be established.
The Commission has said, quite rightly in my view, that the goal of zero immigration mentioned in past Community discussion was never realistic and sought instead to put forward realistic proposals for the protection of the rights of third-country nationals in accordance with the many international treaties that have been signed by Member States, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international covenants of 1966 on civil and political rights and on economic and social rights.
Very clearly, the importance of legal immigration is recognised. The importance of the family as a unit is also recognised and the importance of making a success of the integration of third-country nationals residing lawfully in EU Member States is the whole basis of these proposals.
We have in my committee considered a number of contentious areas, not least the question of the right to bring in ascending relatives. The Commission proposal quite clearly recognises the difference of legal treatment between descending and ascending relatives. It is evident that, in the context of the international legal framework, mention must be made of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. This convention requires states to ensure that the child is not separated from the parents. There is no similar convention dealing with ascending relatives, but it is clearly the case that if we wish to live up to our humanitarian ideals we must provide the opportunity for third-country nationals to bring dependent relatives in the ascending line into their family units. This has been a matter of some debate within the committee. I am pleased to see that a number of amendments to the final report have been put forward; in particular Amendments Nos 18 to 23, which propose a compromise on this matter.
Mr President, on a point of order. Questions to the Council are no longer being answered in the time stipulated. Despite being warned on two occasions, the Council has not answered European Parliament questions. Would you please ensure that the Council fulfils its obligations in this area as well?
Thank you, Mr Rbig. Your request and your comment will be dealt with appropriately.
Mr President, on a point of order. Regarding the questions that will shortly be put to the Commission and the Council, you will be aware that the French Government, confronted by the fuel crisis that has gripped France along with the rest of Europe, took a number of measures yesterday which will drastically alter the conditions of competition and the basis of the fight against the greenhouse effect, and which will, therefore, have an immediate and serious impact on Europe.
Mrs Loyola de Palacio had an extremely interesting article published in the French press this morning on this European crisis. Would it be possible for her and/or the Commissioner for Competition to speak during this part-sitting in order to tell us how the Commission intends to react to the fuel crisis, and how the Commission and the Council intend to prevent an outbreak of fiscal dumping in Europe and prepare Europe to deal with this crisis?
Of course, Mr Lipietz, the point that you have raised is very topical and very urgent, but the agenda has already been fixed, and therefore, I think it will be quite difficult to satisfy your request, although the President will do everything possible to deal with it.
Mr President, the honourable Member's request concerns a matter of importance. The President has very clearly ruled out the possibility of a debate this morning. I shall tell Mrs de Palacio and Mr Monti that Parliament would like to hear them and, together with the Presidency, we shall decide on a suitable time.
the Council statement on doping in sport and sport in society;
the report (A5-0203/2000) by Mrs Zabell, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Community support plan to combat doping in sport [COM(1999) 643 - C5-0087/2000 - 2000/2056(COS)]];
the report (A5-0208/2000) by Mr Mennea, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the report from the Commission to the European Council: With a view to safeguarding current sports structures and maintaining the social function of sport within the Community framework - The Helsinki report on sport [COM(1999) 644 - C5-0088/2000 - 2000/2055(COS)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by thanking you for devoting this morning to sport. In eight days' time, the Olympic Games will be opening in Sydney. Athletes will be gathered there from all over the planet. The results of the various competitions are not yet known; they are not predestined; in sport, anything can happen.
The champions who are preparing to enter this field of dreams have their own schedules. Many are familiar with the world of professional sport, but, as you well know, all of them have at least two things in common. Firstly, their selection is the climax of several years of effort and of meticulous training, with volunteers, coaches and public and private resources all mobilised on their behalf. Secondly, and most importantly, they all began their sporting careers in an amateur club or at a school.
In order to promote sport, we must also - at the same time and as part of the same effort - promote local amateur clubs alongside top-level amateur and professional sport. Sport at the highest level is the stuff of dreams; it contributes to the development of mass sports and, through them, to social education. Elite sport, be it amateur or professional, receives global media coverage today. More and more men and women, whatever their age and their circumstances, are taking part in a sport. Sport has permeated the whole of society.
So, nobody here will be surprised to see how this human activity can sometimes be perverted by acts of violence or racism, or engender greed. Far be it for me to demonise the economic aspect of sport. Sport needs resources, and the public purse cannot provide all the necessary funding. It is not a matter of distinguishing between a pure form of sport which is untainted by money and a sponsored form of sport which is corrupt. No, the real question is a different one and may be expressed as follows: will the sporting community have the means to preserve the ethics of sport by harnessing the funds that flow into sport and ensuring that money does not rule sport?
Let us not beat about the bush. This problem is not one that will arise in twenty years' time; it is already a problem today. Sporting events have become so attractive that financial interests seek to use them as a source of profits, even if it means sacrificing the ethics of sport and treating sportspeople as marketable commodities. Who has not witnessed the sale and purchase of sportsmen, some of whom are still very young? Who has not been shocked by the amounts that are paid for broadcasting rights or by the size of certain transfer fees? Who has not been alarmed at the sight of increasingly overcrowded sporting calendars? Who has not been concerned at the plans of certain private groups to create their own sports competitions, outside the jurisdiction of the national and international federations and on the basis of a single criterion, namely the size of the participating clubs' budgets, as we have recently seen in association football and, subsequently, in basketball too?
What kind of sport do we want for the twenty-first century? The reply to this all-embracing, fundamental question depends on our response to the present situation. There are two options: having identified these excesses, we could consider that sport no longer depends on anything but the market or sportspeople on anything but their added value. In that case, we must apply the rules of competition and compound the present follies with a dose of deregulation, accepting, in the name of freedom of movement, the sale and purchase of youngsters aged between 18 and 20. The other option is to decide, on the basis of the European sporting tradition that has been developed in modern times, with its humanist values and voluntary structures, and in the light of the present situation, with all its economic and social implications, that we should re-equip the sporting community with the legal and political instruments it requires to protect the entire range of sporting activities within the framework of their respective federations.
This second option, which is supported by the French Presidency, does not mean adhering to the status quo, but actually requires innovative proposals from the sporting community itself - and I am gratified to see that these have been forthcoming on the question of transfers - and from governments with a view to combating the excesses that are affecting the sporting world and to developing practices designed to protect the associations and, hence, the cohesion of each sport.
Ladies and gentlemen, the European Parliament has already devoted a huge volume of work to this option, and we are starting to move forward within the Council too. In June 1997, the sports ministers met at the Stade de France in Paris, and this was followed by meetings in Germany, Finland and Portugal. There have been the annex to the Treaty of Amsterdam, the conclusions of the Vienna Council and, last December, the Helsinki report on the subject of sport. Then, at Feira in Portugal, on the occasion of the Council meeting in June 2000, a clear call was made for the specific characteristics of sport to be taken into account in the application of Community policies.
I am afraid I have to start today by announcing the passing away yesterday of our fellow member, Mr Gnter Lttge, who died after a serious illness. Mr Lttge became an MEP in 1989 and was mainly involved in transport policy. I suggest we observe a minute' s silence in his memory.
Mr President, referring to the text adopted yesterday and the issue of human cloning, item 8 in the English version, paragraph 11, reads 'considers that any temporary committee set up by this Parliament ....'. It does not actually say that such a temporary committee should be set up. Could we have some guidance as to what the presidency will do about this particular section of the resolution?
I shall submit this to the Conference of Presidents, Mr Adam, and you will be notified of the outcome.
Mr President, my name does not seem to be on yesterday's attendance list although I did actually sign in.
Mr President, following up the point that Mr Adam made, I presume you will report back at the beginning of the mini-session on the result and, of course, if there is a proposal for the establishment of a temporary committee this House will have to vote on it.
The next item is the report (A5-0200/2000) by Mr Gutirrez-Cortines, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Commission report to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the implementation, results and overall assessment of the European Year of Lifelong Learning (1996), submitted pursuant to Article 8 of European Parliament and Council Decision 2493/95/EC [COM(1999) 447 - C5-0205/1999 - 1999/2163(COS)]
Mr President, the report on the European Year of Lifelong Learning is seemingly an unimportant document, and yet it has revealed significant gaps and black spots in the European system.
The report concerns a year of information and promotion in response to the Luxembourg Summit and other summits, at which tremendous importance was given to training as a means of integrating Europeans into working life, irrespective of age. The report has shown, first of all, that when money is invested in education, that money is multiplied. The Member States keen to participate quadrupled their budgets. That is, money invested in education gives the best results as it is multiplied and does not lead to fraud, or anything like that.
Secondly, the European Year of Lifelong Learning highlighted the Commission's difficulty in providing information and responses and being transparent. It was practically impossible to gather all the necessary documentation, partly, it seems, because the Member States do not provide it, and partly because there are no procedures for collecting it with the necessary ease and speed.
We have therefore turned the report into a response and a series of recommendations on the criteria that we think lifelong learning should meet. We found ourselves with a muddle of criteria, partly introduced by the Council, as the document published by the Commission, the proposal for the Year of Lifelong Learning, was of far higher quality. It is clear that we need much more clarity over training. However, training for integration, language teaching and recreational training for the elderly is mixed up with training for work, resulting in such a muddle that it is impossible to make an assessment or gauge the quality and know what the criteria are for good practice.
So, we are asking for the educational objectives to be clearly distinguished and regulated. Obviously, education for the integration of immigrants is not the same as training for new qualifications, training for a first job or retraining, or many other types. We have therefore requested clarity and better organisation of the system as a whole. We have also requested greater lifelong learning and retraining for teachers. It is clear that, if we consider lifelong learning to be simply for unqualified groups, account will not be taken of retraining university staff and teachers at training centres, who have to be the flagship of knowledge and disseminate information in society.
Finally, we have asked that it be made quite clear where the money from the Structural Funds for training, which is not monitored, is going. From our point of view, this is a key issue. What we cannot have is Europe paying so little attention to education and the education funds being used for other purposes. One of the great problems of European history stems from the fact that once social classes have fought their way up the social scale and succeeded in integrating into the ruling classes, they have imitated the faults of the aristocracy, they have become conceited and lost sight of the value of training and the fight to retain the knowledge they have acquired.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 8 September 2000.
Madam President, sadly, there was another incident of violence in Italy yesterday: a teacher who is Christian by religion but of Jewish origin was attacked and beaten up by a group of skinheads in Verona. Incidents of this nature must be condemned immediately by Parliament and others, for it is unthinkable that any hint of anti-Semitism and xenophobia should still be allowed to exist within our Union. I therefore feel that, laying aside political differences, this House should send a signal, a message expressing our solidarity, to the teacher who was attacked simply because he is of the Jewish race. Madam President, I would like to thank you, and indeed all the Members of Parliament, in advance, for your message of solidarity.
Thank you, Mr Tajani. We shall consider the best way of passing on this entirely justified protest.
Madam President, I asked for the floor to raise the same point. I would be grateful if you could pass on Parliament' s concerns, its fierce condemnation of this act and its sympathy to the young Catholic teacher who was so brutally attacked because of his Jewish origins.
Madam President, I too would like to support Mr Tajani and all the other Members who have spoken on the subject in their condemnation of the racist attack on a Christian teacher of Jewish origin which has taken place in my country, in Verona to be precise. These incidents are incomprehensible, and not only must they be condemned but the perpetrators severely punished.
Madam President, I too would like to support Mr Tajani' s statement, which has been echoed in speeches from a number of different quarters and parties. On behalf of the party which I represent, the Alleanza Nazionale, I therefore join you all with the utmost solidarity in severely condemning incidents which make us ashamed to be European. I feel that the sensitivity of this Parliament, in which right and left are united on this matter, will contribute to combating such shameful incidents and eradicating them once and for all.
I would like to raise as a point of order the fact that the Quaestors have made a recommendation that during constituency weeks next year MEPs should be allowed a daily allowance if they are in Brussels. I would like to urge you, Madam President and the Bureau members - I understand this is coming on your agenda very soon - to think very carefully before taking this decision because constituency weeks are a very good idea. There is a desperate need for MEPs to communicate with the electorate in a much more effective way. The fact that we had such a poor turnout in the European elections proves that this is the case and, if we allow people to sign in during constituency weeks, we are undermining the whole point of them.
We are giving fuel to the Eurosceptics who think that we are pumping up our own expenses and we look like hypocrites at a time when we are asking the Commission to reform.
Madam President, I urge you and the Bureau members to consider this issue very carefully and turn down the request by the Quaestors.
I have not yet received this recommendation by the Quaestors. That is why it has not yet been placed on our Bureau' s agenda. Once I have received it, the Bureau will, of course, examine it very carefully indeed.
I wish to draw our fellow MEPs' attention to a demonstration which is leaving Brussels today for Paris and to ask them to exercise the utmost vigilance where this is concerned. The demonstration has been organised by scientologists and is supposed to be a marathon against the religious intolerance practised in France. I think this is an extremely dangerous demonstration, given that France is a country in which the fight against religious cults has had some very significant successes. Europe still needs to be inspired by such successes, informed as they are by the values of secularism and tolerance, by which I mean true tolerance and not that practised by religious cults.
Since the matter has been raised in the public arena, could I place on record the reason for the Quaestors' recommendation? We believe that the term "constituency weeks" was an unfortunate one. They are weeks without meetings but they are weeks when the Commission, the Council and all other agents of this Parliament, including the political groups, are hard at work.
If we are going to Nice to ask for more powers for this Parliament it is hardly a good precedent for us to send the whole Parliament off for four weeks, away from the place where they are elected to do their duty.
Consequently, we believe that those Members - and there are many of them - who are writing reports, chairing committees, running groups and have legitimate reasons to be here should, on declaration of those objectives, be able to come and do their work in the place that they were elected to do it.
Mr President, I should publicly like to reject and condemn the botched procedure, although I do not know if it has been adopted by the Conference of Presidents, the Presidencies of the Council and the Commission or the Presidency of Parliament, for dealing with an issue as important and far-reaching as terrorism in Spain. This may be in line with the Rules of Procedure, but it is neither ethically nor democratically acceptable for such a crucial issue to be dealt with using a procedure that does not provide for a political debate on a specific proposal for a resolution to which all of the interested parliamentary groups can present amendments. As I see it, the procedure adopted asserts that a written declaration presented by five Spanish Members of the European Parliament - who are fully within their rights to do so - can become the official position of Parliament. If this were the case, however, it would amount to a position adopted selfishly, by the back door and almost by stealth, so as to prevent other groups and Members from having the chance to present amendments or changes with the aim of achieving a broad consensus on the text.
Mr President, representatives of the Council and the Commission, might I be so bold as to say that what has happened today is a huge political mistake, and that something as important as Parliament' s position on terrorism will not have the broad support of everyone, since there will be some who, whilst unequivocally rejecting and condemning terrorism...
I am very sorry Mr Ortuondo, we are now taking note of the fact that you do not approve of what has been decided. However, this is a decision taken by the competent bodies of this Parliament. We have taken note of your opinion.
Let us turn to what we should be talking about, namely the Minutes, as Mr Ortuondo did not comment on the Minutes. Who wants to comment on yesterday' s Minutes?
Mr President, I would like to draw attention to a deplorable state of affairs at the European School I in Brussels. Thousands of children and young people - most of whom are the offspring of our officials - have not had any lessons since the end of June. They have, as yet, been unable to start the first term of the new school year. It was originally scheduled for 7 September. Several days previous to that, it was postponed until today, and now the parents have been informed once again that the term cannot begin because some major building work has yet to be completed. The renovation work has been going on for years at this school, and the asbestos problems are a familiar tale too. Yet no alternative arrangements were made for the children. I urge the President of our Parliament, in conjunction with the Commission, to ensure that this disgraceful state of affairs is not resolved at the children' s expense. I cannot believe what is going on! School attendance is compulsory and yet the children are unable to fulfil this requirement.
Mrs Schleicher, it would be particularly tragic if children were to suffer because it is impossible to receive an education. I am taking note of this and will pass it on, at your request, to the Bureau and other competent Parliament bodies. We will see what we can do.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on terrorism in Spain.
This debate is opened on behalf of the Council and Commission. I have been informed that Minister Paul, representing the Council, is still on his way and hopes to arrive here very shortly. He is on his way here on the train from Paris and, as the sitting started early, is unable to attend at present. But I assume that Commissioner Vitorino is ready to make his statement now, and we will wait and see whether the Minister will be arriving shortly. If this is the case, I should like to give the floor to Commissioner Vitorino, who will be speaking on behalf of the Commission.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has been disturbed to see renewed acts of violence in the Basque Country. The Commission agrees with the repeated and forceful statements that have been made condemning these loathesome acts of terrorism committed in the territory of the Member States of the European Union - in all Member States, but particularly in Spain. Terrorism represents one of the greatest challenges our societies face and is unacceptable, because of the indiscriminate violence that characterises it, and which particularly affects the civilian population. Terrorist attacks shock and sadden the entire European public and fully deserve to be rejected because Europe's citizens continue to express their unrelenting desire to share a peaceful future. The Commission believes that the solidarity shown by the other Member States can and must support the Spanish authorities' fight against terrorism. The Commission therefore welcomes the step forward represented by the enshrinement in the Treaty of Amsterdam of the principle of solidarity in the fight against terrorism. Article 29 of the Treaty on European Union specifically mentions terrorism as one of the forms of crime to be prevented and fought at European level and one of the areas in which the European Union can bring added value to this fight.
The European dimension of the fight against terrorism is not, however, a recent concept. Some key acts of cooperation between the judicial systems and police services of at least two states, particularly on both sides of the French-Spanish border, have recently produced some good results in this fight against terrorism. For its part, the Commission is cooperating with the Member States and with Europol with the same aim. Similarly, in the framework of action by the Council of Europe and the United Nations, there are various appropriate international conventions against terrorism that have not yet been signed, but which are currently being negotiated.
Nevertheless, these new attacks unfortunately show that these efforts are still not enough to eliminate terrorism. We must go further in terms of European cooperation. A few words on behalf of the Commission would be appropriate here, heartfelt words of respect for and in tribute to the victims of terrorist attacks, who have often been representatives of the people, whose legitimacy comes from the ballot box in democratic elections. I also wish to pay tribute to those who have fallen victim to terrorism because they are carrying out their professional duties out of a sense of duty as servants of the state and of the people. But I also wish to pay tribute to those arbitrary victims of terrorism, the anonymous members of the public who refuse to live under the blackmail of fear. The finest tribute that I can pay is exactly this, to prove that we in the European institutions are able to contribute to this collective effort on the part of Europe' s citizens.
The Treaty of Amsterdam, as I have already stated, enables the European Union to make this contribution. Immediately following its entry into force, therefore, the Heads of State and Government meeting at the Tampere European Council included terrorism in their overall approach to combating all forms of crime. Clear political commitments were given, such as the commitment to set up joint investigation teams, which, in my view, represent the most effective instrument for fighting terrorism at its very roots. Europol, whose mandate expressly covers terrorism, must also give its support to this joint action and participate in these joint investigation teams. The greater operational capacity Europol has, the more effective its support will be. Although it is true that in many cases bilateral cooperation between police forces is an essential instrument for combating terrorism, it is no less true that the need to establish the link between some terrorist acts and other forms of organised crime, in its methods, in its networks of activity and even in its sources of financing, requires a multilateral, not just a bilateral vision of the phenomenon of terrorism.
Furthermore, Mr President, instruments for judicial cooperation, specifically those designed to prevent criminals from benefiting from and taking advantage of the differences in legislation across Europe, will also enable us to reduce, or even, one day, to eliminate all the obstacles that are raised when an application is made to extradite terrorists from one European Union country to another to stand trial. The path we must take is quite clear, as it was decided in Tampere that formal extradition proceedings between Member States for those who have actually been sentenced must in future be abolished. The principle of mutual recognition of judgments should also apply to final judgments, but also to judgments prior to the trial stage itself. A first objective would therefore be to guarantee that capture orders for the purpose of a trial are implemented, bearing in mind the gravity of the crimes we are talking about, in the event that several warrants are served on the same person.
Our institutional partners now have the responsibility of ensuring that these guidelines, which have already been accepted at political level, are translated more rapidly into laws and into action. Various essential actions for stepping up the fight against terrorism are already included in the scoreboard for the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice. I feel certain that these actions, particularly the commitment given by the Heads of State and Government to the effect that terrorism is one of the forms of crime on which the European institutions will have to adopt common definitions, charges and sanctions, will rapidly be given substance in order to send out a clear message that terrorist acts will not be protected by the legislation of any Member State.
I should therefore like to reiterate the Commission' s commitment to promoting more effective European action against terrorism, using all the means made available to it under the treaties, whether these terrorist acts take place in Spain or in any other Member State, as I have just been informed has happened tonight in the United Kingdom. In democratic societies such as ours, terrorism cannot take shelter behind any supposedly political justification. Terrorism, it must be said, is a dead end and the fact that it has fortunately disappeared from other European countries gives us cause for hope that sooner or later it will also be eliminated in Spain.
It is up to governments to demonstrate to the public in their countries the absurdity of terrorism and to attack it root and branch by means of a multifaceted intervention strategy. I am sure that democratic societies, of which we are proud to belong, will win this battle, as long as we do not abdicate our democratic values and demonstrate that democracy is a powerful system for fighting terrorism and therefore make both preventive policies and the repression of terrorist acts more effective. This is clearly what Spain is doing and is also what the Commission is committed to doing in the fields in which it has competence.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Europe is an area of freedom which we all wish to strengthen. Hence, all terrorist attacks are not just attacks on democracy and the rule of law but they also prevent Europe' s citizens from enjoying the freedom that we all desire. Our commitment and our collective efforts must therefore be directed towards enabling everyone to fully enjoy this freedom. Freedom must not be surrendered to blackmail or to fear, because only in freedom can human dignity be experienced.
Mr President, do you not think that it would be a better idea - and I say this, of course, as a point of order, not as an intervention - if we waited a few more minutes for the Minister to arrive? It would be difficult, you understand, for me to respond to the representative of the Council if he did not have the opportunity to speak first. I therefore suggest that the sitting be suspended for less than 10 minutes, until nine o' clock, which is the time the Minister is due to arrive at Parliament.
Mr Galeote, I hear what you are saying. By way of apology on behalf of Mr Paul, I would like to point out that his train from Paris is due at 8.20 a.m. We expect him here any minute. I would prefer it if we embarked on today' s proceedings rather than adjourn, in view of today' s punishing schedule and the fact that the House decided yesterday to vote at 11 a.m. I would actually like to ask you to make a start. We have heard the Commissioner' s statement. We decided yesterday to start at 8.30 a.m., and it would therefore be odd if we were to suspend proceedings at this stage.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 21 September 2000.
The Minutes of the sitting on Thursday, 21 September have been distributed.
Madam President, I shall keep to the subject of the Minutes. For some strange reason, my name is missing from the register of attendance. I would ask you to correct this and would at the same time take the opportunity to point out that it has been possible today to come here to Strasbourg from Finland in just nine hours. That is almost a personal record for me this autumn!
Yes indeed, Mrs Thors, we shall amend the Minutes accordingly.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the last few days, as you know, Jerusalem, other towns and the Palestinian territories have been thrown into a state of unrest, and there have already been many victims. Earlier today, helicopters bombed targets in Gaza, thereby making the situation worse. I should like, on behalf of the European Parliament, to express my deepest outrage at this new outbreak of violence, and to express our heartfelt sympathy with the families of the victims in their sorrow and suffering.
At a time when the peace process is at a crucial stage, making real but precarious progress, Ariel Sharon' s visit to the Dome of the Rock cannot be seen as anything other than provocation. As this sad state of affairs shows, the status of Jerusalem is one of the keys to peace in the Middle East. The city bears the weight of powerful symbols for all three monotheistic religions. Attacking such symbolism is tantamount to rejecting the will for peace and hindering the search for a solution that is acceptable to all parties.
We do, however, know that, on both sides, there are men of peace who wish to forge ahead. The joint visit by Mr Ahmed Qurie and Mr Avraham Burg, Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council and Speaker of the Knesset respectively, in this House during our September part-session proved this once again. On the matter of Jerusalem, they displayed an open-mindedness and a willingness to listen that gave us hope.
As this part-session of the European Parliament opens, I call on the international community to do all it can to piece together the threads of dialogue as soon as possible. The European Union has reacted already. I would like to see it increasing its efforts, and the European Parliament will play a full role in this.
I would ask you to observe a minute' s silence.
Madam President, on behalf of the Socialist Group, I would first of all like to support your words and express our complete agreement with them. Please allow me to propose, on behalf of my group, that this very important issue, which involves the responsibilities of the European Union, as you have correctly pointed out, be included in the debate which we are going to hold tomorrow in connection with the Biarritz Summit.
The situation in the Middle East will clearly be one of the issues dealt with at this summit, even though it is informal. I would also like to stress, as you have rightly pointed out, that there has been unacceptable provocation by a leader of the Israeli extreme right known for his extremist activities in the past. I also believe that we must address our Israeli friends in the frankest possible terms and tell them that a democratic and legitimate government, such as theirs, cannot use gunfire and tanks to fight children and youths throwing stones. This is absolutely disproportionate and in no way helps the peace process.
Madam President, I believe that, after the visit - on your invitation - of the Presidents of the Israeli and Palestinian assemblies last month, we have sufficient moral legitimacy to address our partners in the Middle East in the strongest terms, while offering them our services.
Madam President, I sent you a letter on behalf of my group requesting an amendment to the agenda on the issue which you have just addressed in a most dignified way.
Since Mr Barn Crespo has raised the subject, let me make my point on the matter immediately. In my opinion, since Parliament issued a very timely joint invitation to the Speakers of the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council a month ago, specifically in order to indicate its willingness to become involved in promoting the peace process, we cannot, as Members of this Parliament, remain silent today.
In words with which I identify completely, you described the tragic situation developing right now in Palestine and in Israel. I fully understand that, tomorrow, Mr Prodi, the Council, and ourselves, or some of us, will be speaking in the general debate. We cannot, however, possibly limit ourselves to dealing with this tragic matter alongside a number of other very important matters, thus making it possible for a first person to discuss the Charter, the next to discuss the French Presidency and the Biarritz Summit, a third to bring up the Danish 'no' vote in the referendum on EMU, and only then have a fourth, on the subject of the Middle East. This would not do justice to the matter.
My group and I therefore suggest that, tomorrow if possible, or another day if necessary, we look into finding a way to devote an hour to this extremely important subject, and to adopt a resolution. It this were to prove impossible, I suggest that we should at least have a question on the subject in our topical and urgent debate. In any event, I would expressly ask that we make it impossible for anyone at the end of this part-session to claim that Parliament as such did not follow up your splendid statement and declare itself in favour of a return to peace in Israel and in the Middle East.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you agree, I shall introduce a sort of procedural motion. We have not yet moved on to the discussion of the agenda. I did receive the request you sent me. I suggest discussing whether or not we should enter this subject on the order of business for Tuesday when we move on to the agenda.
Ladies and gentlemen, Germany today celebrates the tenth anniversary of its reunification. Something that had seemed impossible just a few years previously has become reality. This reunification, made possible by the fall of the Berlin Wall the year before, was not only of great significance to the Germans, but also, to the whole of Europe as it symbolised reconciliation between the East and the West after 40 years of cold war.
I would like to express, on behalf of Parliament, our shared pleasure with our friends in Germany in celebrating this anniversary.
Madam President, yesterday we decided - and this is also recorded in the Minutes - to hold a debate on Thursday on developments in the Middle East. However, we did not set a deadline for tabling motions for resolutions. I would request that we set such a deadline, both for the actual motions - this could be today at 6 p.m. and for amendments, where we should try to set the deadline for as late as possible tomorrow, so that we can take into account any results from the meeting between Ehud Barak and Yassir Arafat tomorrow in Paris. I would ask that we set this deadline and that it be as late as possible.
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested that the debate on the situation regarding the Middle East Peace Process, that was timetabled for Thursday afternoon, be closed with a motion for a resolution. I will now put this request to the vote.
Preparation for the informal European Council in Biarritz of 13/14 October/Charter of Fundamental Rights
The next item is the joint debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparations for the informal Biarritz European Council (IGC) of 13 and 14 October 2000, and the following oral questions:
B5-0538/2000, by Mr Napolitano, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to the Council, and
B5-0539/2000, by Mr Napolitano, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to the Commission,
on the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, you expressed the wish that we should devote our efforts today to the forthcoming European Council meeting in Biarritz, and this will indeed be an important milestone in this half-year Presidency of the Council.
You will all be aware that the European Council is now in the habit of meeting, or rather of almost always meeting, twice every six months, and this arrangement would seem to meet a real need, even if - or perhaps I should say especially if - this additional meeting is an informal one, as will be the case in Biarritz.
In fact, the informal nature of these summits, far from limiting their scope, actually enables delicate issues to be openly discussed at the very highest level. The agenda at Biarritz will, as such, comprise two major questions which I know are of concern to the European Parliament: the Intergovernmental Conference on Institutional Reform and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
With regard to the date, this too has been chosen with a view to guaranteeing that this Summit is as productive as possible. The Biarritz Council of 13 and 14 October will come roughly halfway through our presidency; so work will already be well underway, without any compromises having been reached, and the time will have come to take stock and put down a marker with a view to the Nice European Council. As you can see, the aim will therefore not be to discuss every issue, which would not have made a great deal of sense.
However, the French Presidency seems to have attained cruising speed, and would appear to have made completely satisfactory progress on the matters in hand; I am aware that certain observers have been critical, but they doubtless expected too much from us - and this is flattering, but at the same time does not suit us, since a presidency is always too short - only totalling four productive months, I would remind you - and have forgotten that this presidency, just like any other, is subject to many serious constraints.
Certain events which have received ample coverage in the press have thus overshadowed the work done in recent weeks. I refer in particular to the surge in oil prices - and would point out that the members of the European Council will also be discussing this issue - and to the fluctuations in the value of the euro and the referendum in Denmark.
I can nevertheless assure you that we will continue in our efforts on the basis of the timetable set and I feel that the required results have been achieved. I take, by way of example, the latest General Affairs Council, with an initial agreement on MEDA II, the continuing debate on increasing the effectiveness of the Union' s external aid, the message to the Serbian people, which can be seen to have carried weight in the current situation, and the first progress report ever on the enlargement process, which we will be discussing again this afternoon, in this Chamber. Progress has also been made at the latest Justice and Home Affairs Council, which saw the adoption of the Regulation on the European Refugee Fund, the extension of Europol' s powers in the field of money laundering and, lastly, a policy agreement with a view to setting up Eurojust, following a decision taken at the Tampere Summit.
Likewise, the informal Council of Defence Ministers held on 22 September gave reason to hope that completely satisfactory results will be obtained by the end of the presidency as concerns the commitment of capabilities. Not to mention the priorities which we have described as citizens' priorities, since they lie at the heart of the concerns of all the citizens of Europe: growth and employment, their children' s education - this question was discussed at the Education Council held this weekend - the future of social protection and transport safety amid new circumstances marked by the surge in oil prices. Here too, the wheels have been set in motion, and the Presidency, in concert with the Commission and Parliament, is getting down to work.
I will now turn to the actual agenda of the Biarritz European Council, which is to say straight to the Intergovernmental Conference.
Mr President, with regard to yesterday' s debate on Slovakia, I should like to point out that Belgium and other countries have introduced a visa requirement for Slovakia. I regard that as discrimination.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in his policy statement yesterday, Mr Prodi, the President of the Commission, said that whoever weakened any institution of the European Union weakened the Union as a whole. We have, of course, debated the relations between the Commission and the Council here. I should like to refer to the relations between Parliament and the Council and to highlight the fact that there have recently been considerable delays in the Council's replies to our written questions. Let me cite two examples.
In September 1999 I asked a question on the subject of Hombach. It was answered in February 2000. I submitted a written question on the subject of European flight safety in February 2000 and am still awaiting a reply. Whoever weakens any institution weakens the entire Union. I have the impression that the Council in particular has now decided to ignore questions from Parliament. That is unacceptable! If we are to preserve the balance between the institutions, I believe we must take steps to ensure that this defect is rectified.
Mr President, this very day we are going to enthusiastically approve - and with great interest in my case - the reports on enlargement involving candidate countries such as the Czech Republic, which is the subject of Mr Jrgen Schrder' s report. However, I must express my concern - and I ask that the Presidency communicate this to the Prague authorities - at the fact that two young Spaniards, Gaizka Azcona Cueva, 22 years old, and Mikel Oliva Martnez, 21 years old, have been detained arbitrarily since last Tuesday - nearly ten days. It is worrying that this can happen in a country which is going to join the European Union.
Mr Marset Campos, we shall certainly take note of your statement. I am sure that Mrs Fontaine will do all that needs to be done.
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has requested that the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the rights of language teachers, which is currently scheduled to take place on Friday morning, be postponed until the next part-session.
I give the floor to Mr MacCormick, who will present the request on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Mr President, the question concerning language teachers which has been put down for this Friday comes from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market. It was the intention of those who tabled that question in the committee that it should come before the House accompanied by a motion for a resolution. We are discussing a serious matter. From time to time it is rightly said in this House that a citizens' Europe would be a Europe in which rights were properly enshrined in the law of the Union. That would be no good if rights already in the law can be flouted by the Member States.
Twelve years ago the Court of Justice gave a judgment against Italy in the case of the foreign language lecturers. There have been two further judgments since then and the rights of these lecturers have not yet been satisfied. In my opinion, and I say it in the presence of a former attorney-general of Ireland, the Commission has not yet shown sufficient resoluteness in pursuing this matter. It is important that we have a question and debate with a resolution at the end of it. I ask it to be sent back to committee for preparation.
We have now heard Mr MacCormick' s proposal, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request?
Mr President, it may surprise you to learn that I do indeed wish to raise a point of order. I note from the Minutes that the aforementioned ...
the Council statement on: Equal opportunities; equal participation by men and women;
the report (A5-0198/2000) by Mrs Dybkjr, on behalf of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the Commission annual reports 'Equal Opportunities for Women and Men in the European Union - 1997, 1998, 1999'.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this is the third time I have had the pleasure of addressing the House since the French Presidency began. I first addressed the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities on 11 July and, on 5 September, I made a statement about the monitoring centre for industrial change.
Today, I am here to talk about balanced participation by men and women in all areas of society. The motion for a resolution on the Commission' s reports that you will be voting on later goes into great detail on the subject. I would like to comment on three points highlighted by Mrs Dybkjr, and I commend the quality of her work as rapporteur to this House.
First, as regards the need for regular assessment and monitoring of equality at every level regarding work, employment, education, training, family life, health, and the dignity of women, we will only be able to make significant progress if we have the most accurate intelligence on every aspect underlying discrimination.
The second point relates to the new information and communication technologies. This emerging sector is opening up greater access to the world of work for women. We must make sure the gaps in this area are reduced. We must make sure women benefit from the new jobs generated, while avoiding reproducing the inequalities that exist in more traditional sectors: less skilled jobs, part-time work (sometimes not by choice), insecure contracts and difficulties put in the way of access to decision-making posts.
Thirdly and finally, I think the proposal to make implementation of the principle of equal treatment a selection criterion for any Community aid or funding is essential to promoting equality.
Because equality is a major political issue we are going to use a number of events to give it prominence during the French Presidency. I am primarily here today, of course, to discuss those events.
We have organised a Ministerial Conference in Paris. It will be held on 27 October. I have naturally invited Mr Rocard, my eminent fellow countryman, the Chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, and Mrs Theorin, Chair of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities. We will also be organising a Conference on Professional Equality on 24 November, bringing together experts, social partners and company managers, to look at the obstacles in the career paths of women. I shall not, however, be talking about the Conference on Professional Equality so much as the issues I have put on the agenda for the Ministerial Conference on 27 October.
Three issues will be tackled, and they are issues also dealt with in the Presidency' s major documents, either in the Fifth Action Programme or the Social Agenda. The three subjects on the agenda for the Ministerial Conference are balanced participation by women and men in decision-making, combining work and family life, and including equality in several structures of the European Union Council of Ministers.
The first issue, women' s participation in decision-making in all areas, shows the serious deficit women still suffer from today in comparison with men. That is a democratic deficit which is less and less tolerated nowadays. Perhaps some of you remember the Paris Conference of April 1999, when we reached agreement on a statement, but, with fifteen Ministers, had great difficulty deciding on a plan of action with quantified targets.
That is why I decided to seize the opportunity afforded by the Presidency' s major documents, this time, to move that action plan forward.
I can tell you that my country has now marked a crucial milestone as regards women' s participation in decision-making. Very briefly, a reform of the constitution was adopted on 28 June 1999 in France, with the support of the Prime Minister and the President of the Republic, and immediately afterwards we began debating a bill on parity, which was adopted on 3 May 2000. This law will be applied to all elections, including local elections from 2001.
So, at the risk of seeing their electoral lists invalidated or not having their campaign costs refunded, the political parties must present lists with equal numbers of men and women placed alternately to prevent women being relegated to positions where they have little chance of getting elected.
I feel sure that balanced participation of women in political decision-making would produce a genuine renewal of our whole political life. Such power sharing will bring with it other profound changes in economic, social and cultural life.
The Beijing Platform for Action and the final outcome document of the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Beijing + 5, last June, are along the same lines. The Finnish Presidency' s report on women and decision-making sets out clear indicators for evaluating the progress made.
I also want to salute the Commission' s initiative - I think my information is correct, Mrs Diamantopoulou - in taking a decision to have parity between men and women within its committees and groups of experts. We must all commit ourselves to following and developing this encouraging initiative.
The French Presidency would like to make progress in this matter and hopes to approach its partners with proposals for quantified targets for giving women access to decision-making in all areas, the political arena, which I have already mentioned, but also economic and social sectors. Initial consultations undertaken by the French Presidency confirm that this is a central concern in all Member States. I do not mean to imply that we have already reached agreement on the quantified targets, but I can assure you I am putting a good deal of effort into getting that agreement.
The second issue for this Ministerial Conference will cover combining work and family life. Following the example of Finland, a questionnaire has been sent to all the Member States and this will be followed very shortly by a report. A proposal on indicators to measure progress will be put before the Council.
I was hoping to make this issue an important one in the Presidency' s programme so as to ensure continuity of the work done under the Portuguese Presidency. I am thinking of the Evora seminar on maternity and paternity and the resolution on balanced participation by men and women in family life and at work. Because we know that as long as women have to carry the burden of a double working day alone they will continue to face a dilemma between their private and family lives and between their working lives and their lives as citizens. Indeed, as I always say in France, ladies and gentlemen, while a law to impose parity in politics is now within the bounds of possibility, it is more difficult to impose parity in daily life, domestic parity, by law.
Just as the public arena should not be a male monopoly, the private sphere should no longer be the exclusive domain of women. That is why new methods of organising time must be considered, so that all those involved - parents, children, citizens, elected representatives, businesses - have their proper place. This will be one of the strong points of the Ministerial Conference. Let me add that I have also put this item on the agenda of the Conference on Professional Equality of 24 November.
The third issue for the Ministerial Conference will cover the incorporation of gender equality into the work of the various European Union Councils of Ministers. I hope to initiate a process I have used as a working method in France, a method that works well. For the first time, several Councils of Ministers will be dealing with gender equality by linking it with one of the items on their agenda. To give you a couple of examples: at the Education Council there is the issue of mobility of men and women students and teachers, because we have recognised that there is major inequality in mobility; and at the Internal Market, Consumption and Tourism Council there is an item on the development of electronic commerce so as to make it accessible to all, both men and women, because we know there is gender inequality in electronic commerce too.
In addition to the Ministerial Conference and the Conference on Professional Equality, I should also mention two very important documents specifically devoted to equality, but within the area of competence of the Employment and Social Affairs Council. I am thinking of the Fifth Action Programme and the amendment of the 1976 Directive.
On the Fifth Action Programme, I would first like to wholeheartedly thank Mrs Theorin and the rapporteur, Mrs Eriksson, for their work which will, I hope, make it possible to adopt the programme before the end of the year. I know Parliament will be particularly concerned about mainstreaming and the implementation of strategic objectives relating to equality in economic and social life, and - to return to this point once again - balanced participation in decision-making. For my part, I undertake to ensure that the programme' s funding matches up to our ambitions.
By the same token, it falls to us to review the 1976 Directive, 25 years after its adoption. This review will not only bring the law into line with the many rulings from the Court of Justice, but will also incorporate other very important points into Community legislation. I am thinking, for example, of sexual harassment as gender-based discrimination. The notion of indirect discrimination will be more precisely defined and the derogations from equal treatment supported better. This is a particularly important advance for women, as Mrs Hautala is sure to emphasise when she presents her report to Parliament on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.
Going beyond the specific issues falling within the scope of my ministry, I want to mention three initiatives, very briefly. First of all, the guidelines for employment, this time fleshed out with quantified targets, which propose to increase the employment rate for women to 60% by 2010. The role of the social partners is also strengthened, and I am very pleased about that. Finally, in a word, the fourth pillar devoted to equal opportunities reinforces the integrated approach to equality through gender mainstreaming and through specific guidelines.
The second initiative I want to mention relates to the social agenda to be submitted to the Nice Summit, next December. This is one of the Presidency' s great priorities and, as you know, it opens up a broad field of action in employment, and clearly makes the point that combining work and family life makes a contribution to this. Personally, I would like to see this issue taken into account even more specifically in the social agenda. I think we can all congratulate ourselves on the fact that the agenda contains a chapter devoted to the promotion of gender equality and, in that area too, I hope we will progress towards quantified targets.
Mr President, I wish to comment on this morning' s agenda, which, as you know, is particularly lean, even though extremely important events are taking place in Europe and it is most striking that we have held an entire part-session without having a single debate on the single currency.
Last week, on 24 September, an extremely important referendum was held, in which the Danes rejected the single currency. Yesterday, the European Central Bank raised its intervention rates by a quarter of a point, which led to a further fall in the euro' s value. There are two conclusions to be drawn here. Firstly, the public will never take any interest in our debates if Parliament persists in side-stepping discussions on every important issue. Secondly, the euro is an artificial currency and it would be a disaster to make a complete changeover to the euro in the present circumstances.
Mr President, I just wanted to draw attention to the huge pile of documents we needed for voting this week. I would like to congratulate the honourable Members. We have all been very industrious.
The next item is the report (A5-0237/2000) by Mr Seppnen, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the proposal for a Council Decision amending Decision 2000/24/EC so as to extend the Community guarantee granted to the European Investment Bank to cover loans for projects in Croatia (COM(2000) 289 - C5-0336/2000 - 2000/0122(CNS)).
Mr President, the European Investment Bank grants loans to non-EU countries, guaranteed by the European Union. The bank guarantees individual loans freely in accordance with its own criteria and not the precise guidelines laid down by the EU.
However, the Union has fixed a ceiling for the loans it guarantees. The loans are not guaranteed one hundred percent and the Council decided in December 1999 to guarantee just 65% of the final total for loans for the period 2000-2007. For the rest the bank must itself obtain other forms of security or cover the risk itself. In practice there is no risk and the European Investment Bank would even be prepared to lower the percentage the EU guarantees.
There is a special Guarantee Fund in the Union budget for loans from the EIB. For each guarantee, funds are transferred from a special reserve into the Guarantee Fund, with a maximum amount decided in the finance frameworks contained in the interinstitutional agreement. In 2000 a maximum of 204 million euros can be transferred from the reserve to the Guarantee Fund. Technically 9% of the sum for EIB loans should be transferred from the reserve into the Guarantee Fund, a figure representing 65% of the nominal value of the loans.
The Guarantee Fund in the budget is also used for macroeconomic aid to non-EU countries. It is a cheap way for the Member States to grant development aid. These loans are granted on political grounds to the EU' s humble partners and they are guaranteed one hundred percent by the Guarantee Fund, unlike the Investment Bank loans.
In macroeconomic aid it is often a question of the EU' s share in an overall package in which other sources of aid are the World Bank and the IMF. Generally, financial aid to non-member countries is granted in accordance with the economic and political behavioural criteria set by the IMF - the more guarantees are given for Investment Bank loans, the less macroeconomic aid can be granted, and vice versa. The Guarantee Fund can also be used to guarantee the Euratom loans to support the development of core industries in non-member countries, although no transfers from the reserves to the Guarantee Fund have had to be organised for these sorts of loans in recent years.
In December 1999 the Council decided the maximum amount for guarantees for the Investment Bank for the period 2000-2007, and produced a list of non-member countries that would be entitled to receive aid. The European Parliament adopted a position on the matter in a report by Mrs Rhle in autumn 1999. As Parliament has been heard, the matter is no longer being discussed in Parliament with regard to the terms and conditions of the guarantees.
Parliament must today decide a very simple matter: whether Croatia should join that group of countries to which the European Investment Bank may grant loans with an EU guarantee. Croatia is no longer at war and democratic change has taken place there. So there are good grounds for the country joining the group of borrowers, just as there are to increase the ceiling of the EIB mandate. If Parliament could table amendments to the Council Decision it would certainly remind us of Croatia' s unemployment and social problems, which are the result of that country being put on a slimming regimen, but there is no legal basis here for such amendments.
The same problem of legal competence will also apply in the decision to be discussed soon in Parliament regarding Turkey joining the group of those countries receiving loan guarantees given by the EU to the European Investment Bank. Parliament is bound to have a lot of conditions it would like to impose on loans to Turkey, but at the time we will be making a decision in practice with regard to just one word. Today we add Croatia to the list of those receiving guarantees and then it will be Turkey' s turn.
In this connection we will at the same time make it known to the Commission that next year the Guarantee Fund reserves will not be sufficient for guaranteeing the loans we can expect.
Mr President, this proposal for a Council decision with a view to extending, for the first time, the Community guarantee for the European Investment Bank undoubtedly has a truly extraordinary scope.
Before commenting specifically on the issues raised by this proposal for a decision, I should like to express our support for it, since it endorses Parliament' s position on relations between the European Union and Croatia. For this very reason, I wish to state from the outset that I share the concerns expressed by the rapporteur a few minutes ago on the situation of the loan guarantee reserve, whose narrow margin could cause problems should any unforeseen events occur.
There is one decision that must be put in a dual context. We should consider Croatia' s situation firstly from a strictly political point of view. We must welcome the new political direction that is being taken there, following the legislative and presidential elections. The European Union must encourage Croatia to remain firmly grounded in democracy and the rule of law and there is no doubt that this encouragement must be translated into action involving financial support to improve the economic situation there and to enable the Croatian people to make the necessary sacrifices to balance out the fundamental deficits in their public accounts.
The EIB can and must play a leading role in the region, but this powerful financial instrument serving the external policy of the Union, whose activities, in accordance with the mandate provided by the 1999 decision, cover more than sixty countries, must match its actions to those of the Commission. It must also be made clear that the Commission cannot distance itself from the recent agreement that was reached in the tripartite dialogue in July, when a commitment was given to the effect that every new proposal' s compatibility with existing financial programming must be substantiated in the financial statement.
From the operational point of view, I believe that both the loan guarantee reserve that has been provided for in the current financial perspective, and the functioning of the Guarantee Fund require an improvement in the mechanisms for achieving the objectives of quality and efficiency in Union loans that are given budgetary guarantees. In this sense, the rapporteur' s analysis strikes me as being an admirable starting point. It does not seek to cast doubt on the budgetary protection plan nor on the role of the EIB. The Interinstitutional Agreement provides for a series of three-part dialogues to take place within the budgetary procedure. Given this context and bearing in mind the narrow margin of the loan guarantee reserve, which is set at EUR 200 million per year, there is no reason why we should not discuss the priority uses of this margin in coming years.
Our aim is clearly to improve the efficiency of the European Investment Bank. In order to achieve this, the Commission must ensure that the most thorough assessment possible of its activities will be carried out. We cannot content ourselves with saying that we have a reliable system of guarantees. In the budgetary procedure for 2001, our political group has maintained a strategy of pursuing a marked improvement in the quality of expenditure and an improvement in the mechanisms for monitoring its performance. It is time to call for the same objectives with regard to the activities of the EIB. What is clear is that Parliament cannot restrict its role to passively assimilating the information supplied to it by the Commission and the EIB, or to giving its blessing to the decisions of the Council.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report by the Committee on Budgets under discussion, which recommends extending the Community guarantee given to the European Investment Bank to loans granted to Croatia, deals with two important matters.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 6 October 2000.
Madam President, the Minutes of the Parliamentary sitting tell us that the issue was raised in this Chamber of the racist attack made on a teacher in Verona. The Minutes also say that Parliament condemned the incident and, in particular, expressed its solidarity with the teacher. I would like to inform you that the teacher in question invented the whole story and has confessed that he was not the victim of an attack at all but that his wounds were self-inflicted. What this amounts to is that we have all been taken for a ride. I just wanted to inform you of this, seeing that this hoodwinking of Parliament by the teacher from Verona is recorded in the Minutes.
Mr Speroni, this information does not, most probably, require any amendment to the Minutes, but I take note of your comment nonetheless.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, since our last part-session, a fortnight ago, three more people have been shot and killed by ETA. Let me mention their names and, in commemorating them, express our compassion and sympathy at this time of sadness to the members of their families: Luis Portero, Chief Public Prosecutor of the Regional Court of Andalucia, murdered in Granada on 9 October; Antonio Munos Carignanos, a colonel and doctor in the Spanish air force, murdered in Seville on 16 October; Maximo Casado, a prison service employee, murdered yesterday morning in Vitoria.
It is on behalf of the whole House that I express our most sincere condolences and deepest sympathy to the families and friends of these people. These victims take the number of ETA murder victims since the cease-fire was broken on 3 December 1999 to a total of sixteen. Even if we cannot find the words to express our response to such a tragedy, we must not give up the fight by any means. Quite the opposite. As we have always done on each of these sad occasions, we must, once again, condemn this intolerable behaviour. The right to life is sacrosanct. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, which was approved in Biarritz by unanimous decision of the Heads of State and Government, reaffirms this most categorically.
I would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to pay tribute to these victims by observing a minute' s silence, and to lend our support to the authorities and to democrats in Spain in their fight against this scourge, a fight that often puts their lives in jeopardy. Thank you for observing a minute' s silence.
President. Unfortunately, I must again take the floor to pay tribute to the memory of all those who have been victims of the upsurge of hatred and xenophobia in the Middle East.
Tomorrow, this House will discuss this sensitive issue as part of its debate on the Biarritz European Council, but today I should just like to express my deep sadness at a phenomenon that we find disturbing in the extreme, since it is a tragic illustration of the baleful influence of the extremists on both sides.
On behalf of all the Members of this House, I would express our deepest sympathies to all the members of the families of the victims of this conflict, and further express my solidarity with all the people wounded in the conflicts.
I hope, moreover, that the advocates of peace and dialogue will ultimately succeed in prevailing over those that incite to violence and hatred.
President. Finally, as you know, several days ago, torrential rain caused unprecedented damage in Switzerland and Italy, resulting in the deaths of twenty-five people, injuring many more, and occasioning extensive material damage.
The day before yesterday, in Spain, heavy rain and flooding was also to blame for the deaths of three people, with three others reported missing.
I should like, on behalf of the European Parliament, to express our distress at these events and to offer the families of the victims our deepest sympathy. If you agree, I shall once again ask you to observe a minute' s silence in honour of these victims.
Madam President, I see from Item 13 of the Minutes, entitled 'Communication of the announcement of the removal of Mr Le Pen from office' , that you presumed to speak on behalf of Parliament, and that the chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs presumed to speak on behalf of that committee.
I would simply like to point out that Parliament was not in itself called upon to give an opinion. As for Mrs Palacio' s interpretation of events, I have a great deal of respect for the chairman on a personal level but none at all for her interpretation, which derives from a prior decision by the Committee made when it chose to postpone ruling on this issue. While the Council of State was in the process of examining the appeal lodged by Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, the committee in no way refrained from discussing the consequences of this appeal, nor even from assessing the decision taken.
This situation seems to me all the more serious since while French law expressly stipulates that a ruling from the Council of State concerning a Member of the European Parliament must be given in plenary session, it was only pronounced in this case by two sub-sections, which constitutes a serious breach of Mr Le Pen' s rights. As a result, I consider that Article 7(4) of our Rules of Procedure has not been respected.
Mr Gollnisch, I can assure you that procedures have been respected absolutely, in both the spirit and the letter of Article 12(2) of the Act of 20 September 1976. The only issue open to debate is whether or not I should have taken note of the decree terminating Mr Le Pen' s mandate as soon as the French government notified me of it. As you know, the Committee on Legal Affairs advised me to wait for the decision from the Council of State, which I did. However, everything was done exactly by the book, and in conformity with the Rules of Procedure.
Madam President, the Minutes state that I spoke on the situation in Spain. I spoke on the repression in Spain and the situation in the Basque country, which is totally different. I would not speak about ETA terrorist acts and say I am speaking about the situation in Spain. This has not been fairly reported in the Minutes. I would say that I spoke on the situation in the Basque country and about the Spanish Government' s repression. You can check it in the verbatim report of proceedings.
Madam President, I speak with regard to Item 14 of the Minutes on the waiver of Mr Pacheco Pereira' s parliamentary immunity. We opposed this waiver, Madam President, which answers the question that you were just asking, in the name - to quote from Paragraph D of Mr MacCormick' s report - in the name of the "independent nature of European parliamentary immunity compared with national parliamentary immunity" . I would remind you that the Greek word for such independence would be 'auto nomoi' , which means 'having its own laws' , and as the rapporteur says "its own rules" .
It follows that, if the Parliament has its own rules concerning the waiver of parliamentary immunity and if its discretion is not limited when the national authority requires that immunity be waived, then it is even more true that, this being so much more minor an issue, it also has its own rules when it is required to terminate a Member of Parliament' s mandate. It has its own laws, its 'autonomy' , it has discretionary powers and its discretion is not limited. Yesterday, Madam President, you had discretionary powers, as did Parliament, and there were no limits on this discretionary power. That was the legal error on your part, Madam President.
Mr Martinez, you have jumped the gun on the vote on the report concerning Mr Pacheco Pereira. I would remind you that the vote is to take place at 12.30.
Madam President, on a point of order. Following the Danish referendum will you now write to the Danish Prime Minister to congratulate the Danish people on having struck an historic blow for freedom, democracy and the nation state? The euro was meant to symbolise the strength and unity of Europe ...
This is not a point of order, Mr Helmer. At least in this case, that is very clear.
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the Informal European Council in Biarritz, held on 13 and 14 October 2000.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to return to this House - as the French Presidency undertook to do on 3 October - to present the results of the Informal European Council in Biarritz to which, Madam President, you, as ever, made a highly valued contribution.
As I have mentioned previously, most of the time available was taken up with the institutional reforms currently being examined at the Intergovernmental Conference, which I think was as it should be, and I will therefore begin with them.
Mr President, I would like my name to be added to yesterday's attendance register. I can prove that I was also here for the roll-call vote, but I had not entered my name.
Mr President, I wonder if this might be an appropriate time to mention an issue that arose yesterday during voting time.
It will be recalled that there was one particular vote in the plenary session on my report that was resolved by a majority of one vote. I do not want to reopen that issue. The Presidency declared that closed and I fully accept that. But following that decision a whole range of Members in this House began to indicate that machines had not worked and so on.
It has occurred to me overnight that if the result of a vote is declared and there is within the Rules no provision for the issue to be reopened at all, given the alarming frequency with which a whole range of machines do not work, this could create serious difficulties. If there were a technical difficulty and a whole block of votes in one part of this House were not counted, the outcome of the votes would call into question the whole efficacy of the decisions that we make.
I wonder whether in fact there should be some provision in the Rules for that. I hope that you will feel that is a genuine point of order.
I remember the situation perfectly, Mr Evans. We will put the matter to the Bureau. I will, of course, inform the President of what you have said.
Mr President, parallel to that point of order could it be also borne in mind that the interpreters are very kind to us and sometimes they do not translate "my machine failed to work" as "I failed to work".
Mr President, I rise on a matter concerning the meeting today of the College of Commissioners, under Rule 38 or 64. I would like to request that Commissioner Lamy makes an emergency statement to this House as to why he is avoiding parliamentary scrutiny on a paper known as "everything but arms".
This has profound implications for this House, for ACP countries and for Europe as a whole. I say profound implications because this House wants more and more democratic accountability. This particular issue will not only affect this House, but most of the European Member States, particularly those that have such products as bananas - which are very topical - rice and sugar.
Mr Lamy should make this statement today to make sure that we do have democratic accountability. It appears that he has no wish to discuss this issue with Parliament. It is of great importance.
Mr President, Mr Evans has just referred to yesterday morning' s vote, specifically to the vote at which certain amendments were adopted by a majority of one.
I believe it is as well for Parliament to keep to the current Rules because, as another Member rightly said, very often it is not the machines that did not work but the Members that forgot to vote; if we were able to correct a vote after the event, we would never see the end of it. We had a good example in the final vote on Mr Evans' report. If I had known that the total number of abstentions and votes against was going to be greater than the number of votes in favour of Mr Evans' report, I would have asked my Group to vote against that report and it would not have been adopted. So you can see how absurd the situation would become if a vote could be reconsidered, and I think we would be well advised to go on abiding by our Rules as they stand.
In any case, ladies and gentlemen, we will discuss the matter at the next Bureau meeting.
Mr President, I just wanted to clarify, for Mr Goebbels' benefit, that I am not raising an issue about individual Members pointing out problems in relation to just their machine or whatever. I am concerned about the possibility of a general failure of numerous machines and rules which would then call the decisions of the House into question.
Let me also assure Mr Goebbels that I do not object to matters being decided by a majority of one. The British Labour Government was defeated by a majority of one in 1979 and I never objected to that.
As you know, there have been attacks on synagogues in several European countries in the last few days.
Because of the vote on the budget, no urgent resolutions were scheduled for this October part-session. So I think it appropriate for me to make a statement condemning these unspeakable acts on behalf of the European Parliament, which has always advocated respect for religious freedom and tolerance between all communities.
Certain Members who are closely involved because of their duties in the European Parliament joined me yesterday to meet representatives of the leading religious communities of France, as this is the country which has experienced the most disturbing wave of such violence. At the end of that meeting we made a joint appeal condemning these criminal acts, affirming our joint vigilance against any resurgence of racism, anti-Semitism or xenophobia, and our determination to work together to promote respect for others and rapprochement between citizens resident in our Member States, regardless of nationality or religious belief.
As you know, the European Parliament was responsible for a joint statement by the three institutions on the fight against racism and xenophobia as long ago as 1985. Since then, we have extended our action through numerous measures and initiatives, the latest being the Charter of Fundamental Rights. We shall pursue that action tirelessly.
Madam President, my intervention refers to the situation in the Ivory Coast.
This week there is no debate on topical and urgent subjects. Yesterday it was the turn of the people of the Ivory Coast, after Serbia, to set an example of commitment and the fight for democracy by opposing a military coup d' tat and rigged elections. I believe you should send Mr Laurent Gbagbo, the winner of the elections, a message of solidarity and support from the European Parliament.
I shall be very happy to do so, Mr Barn Crespo.
Draft amendments to Sections I, II, IV, V, VI, VII and VIII of the draft general budget for 2001 concerning the European Parliament, the Council, the Court of Justice, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, and the Ombudsman.
(The Greens opened yellow umbrellas with the words "Climate Change" on them) President. That yellow goes very nicely with our blue seats but, even so, I invite you to furl your umbrellas, so that the vote on the budget can proceed with the dignity befitting this Parliament.
Wynn (PSE), chairman of the Committee on Budgets. Madam President, as you said earlier, this will be a long process. Normally we like to streamline the budget votes so that we can get through them in as quick a time as possible. However, we have a lot of amendments on this occasion. Whilst I respect people's democratic right to table amendments, can I just warn Members of this House that if some of the amendments which are not in the general framework agreement between the groups are voted, then we will begin to exceed ceilings and we will have to stop the vote.
We have no margins in virtually all the categories. If this vote does not go as we had planned, then just be aware that I may be standing up, or Mrs Haug may be standing up, to say we have to stop the vote. We can then assess what we can vote on.
I would like to make two pleas. One is to our colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture who have tabled over 30 amendments. The amending letter will be coming forward before second reading and that is when we will take final decisions on agricultural issues. If I could ask them to withdraw those amendments it would save a lot of time.
I would also ask Mr Heaton-Harris and his colleagues if they could withdraw their 33 amendments. Once again that will save us a tremendous amount of time. I must say the 33 amendments are far better than the 393 that were tabled by Mr Heaton-Harris and his colleagues in committee. So we have to be grateful there are only 33, but I would welcome it if he would withdraw them. It would speed this process up considerably.
Madam President, following Mr Wynn's observation about the number of amendments my committee might or might not have tabled, it is fair to point out that this is part of the democratic process and if we are not here to question and raise points, then what are we here for?
Madam President, I would point out though that we still have not received an answer to one question, namely whether the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is prepared to withdraw its amendments. I would be very interested in this, because it is by far our most serious problem. You see, if we accept one single amendment - you know this, fellow delegates know it, I have said it more than once - then we will, as it were, already be in breach of the Interinstitutional Agreement, because we will then have gone over the margin for payments. Would you perhaps like to repeat the question to someone from the Committee on Agriculture?
Madam President, I understand the rapporteur's objections, but the vote on the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will not only be about money but also about a particular political line. The amendments go some way towards making it clear what the Agriculture Committee wants, and unfortunately we do not see ourselves in a position to withdraw them; instead, we will put them to the vote and we will see what the House makes of them. We in the Agriculture Committee believe that the views which they express are sensible and we cannot therefore withdraw the amendments. I hope that I am also speaking here on behalf of the other coordinators.
The next item is the oral question to the Commission (B5-0546/00) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the state of negotiations for a new fisheries agreement with Morocco.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I must begin by lamenting the fact that the Commissioner for Fisheries, Mr Fischler, cannot be here today. I have been talking to him in person this week in connection with a fisheries event taking place simultaneously in Brussels, which we have already criticised in our Committee on Fisheries: a seminar on control over fisheries is being held, to which MEPs were invited during a week in which we also have a plenary sitting in Strasbourg, the timetable for which was known a year in advance. This is therefore doubly serious. I have made this known to Mr Fischler and I am now repeating it publicly here.
Faced with this situation and the imminence of negotiations which might begin next Monday in Brussels, I do not think the Commission will give us much information today, due to the fact that it will do this - we hope - on Monday 30 October. The logic of not unveiling here - as the Commissioner himself said to me - the strategy that is to be revealed at the said negotiations, is justified and worthy of respect.
So, as chair of the Committee on Fisheries, I would like to use our oral question and this debate to talk to both sides - since our motion for a resolution is addressed to both sides - about a few issues, and I would like to do so very calmly.
First, I would like to emphasise the great concern of the Committee on Fisheries over the huge delay in negotiations - almost a year from the end of the previous agreement - which is the reason behind our oral question, which was formulated in September.
Secondly, I would like to emphasise the agreement reached within our committee - and I would remind you here of our powers regarding an assent which is necessary for a fisheries agreement with Morocco - an agreement to convey the unequivocal message contained in our committee' s motion for a resolution which all the political groups have negotiated and presented together and upon which we are voting today.
On the subject of the said motion for a resolution, I would like to highlight our firm support for the European Commission to continue negotiating with Morocco, and our call for Morocco to negotiate and find the best, most beneficial solution for both parties, as this is possible and must be found. As stated in our proposal, it is impossible that within the context of close relations of every kind (political, economic, commercial, financial, cultural, etc.) between two parties who have signed an association agreement for there to be no room for the fisheries cooperation that the European Union is asking for. There is plenty of room for cooperation in the field of fisheries, and with willingness on both sides, it can, and must, be achieved. There need only be one yardstick for the conservation of fish stocks. The European Union applies to its common fisheries policy the fundamental principle of responsible fishing and the conservation of resources, which are essential conditions for everyone, for the Moroccans, for the Europeans and for the non-Europeans who fish in Morocco.
On the other hand, having said this, we also maintain that not just any agreement will suffice. It must be an agreement which provides an impetus for fisheries cooperation and the Moroccan fishing industry, but which also fully satisfies the fisheries interests of the European fleets. It would be a pity for so much effort not to lead to a solution that we all want so much, or for our relations with the sovereign people of Morocco to be obstructed or clouded at a time when the new young monarchy is initiating a stage of progress that inspires hope and when relations with the European Union must play a decisive role in supporting such hope. I repeat, it would be a pity to dash so much hope for the future and so many possibilities for mutual understanding.
We also tell the Commission in section 8 what we expect from it should it be unable to reach a satisfactory agreement.
From this rostrum and with the weight of representing European democracy on our shoulders, I call for good sense and wisdom from both parties, who will meet in Brussels on 30 October at the highest level - the European Fisheries Commissioner and the Moroccan Minister for Fisheries if, as I hope, his attendance in Brussels is confirmed, and the technical delegations, with the Moroccan Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Morocco, if this too is confirmed, with the Director-General for Fisheries of the European Union as chair - so that serious dialogue may take place and solutions be found.
I will end, Mr President, by saying that there are many ways of reaching this agreement and there is still time, although unfortunately not much. This is what the people of the European Union, whom we represent here, are demanding.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has maintained a constant position throughout the contacts it has had with Morocco, a position which reflects the mandate approved by the Council in October 1999. It is now appropriate for us to initiate a new phase in our relations with Morocco, in a spirit which is best exemplified by our practical proposals concerning the aid that can be given to encourage growth and development in the Moroccan fishing industry, in line with the priorities set by the Moroccan Government in its five-year plan. All the efforts we have achieved over the last few months whenever the parties concerned have had meetings at a technical or political level, have essentially focused on outlining a new partnership in the fishing industry, a partnership which must be well-balanced and to our mutual advantage.
Following the last visit by Mr Fischler to Morocco on 16 October, when he was received by His Majesty, King Mohammed VI, and was able to talk with the Moroccan Prime Minister, Mr Youssoufi, as well as with the Minister for Fisheries, substantial progress seems to be within our grasp. We may quite rightly assume that the discussions held resulted in the actual initiation of talks on the content of a new partnership in the fishing industry. We agreed that the new form of cooperation thereby established must take account of the interests of both parties and we took note of the fact that Morocco considered the potential spin-offs of a new partnership in terms of jobs to be an important element of our cooperation.
The Commission emphasised on behalf of the Community that it was ready to provide Morocco with assistance in developing its fishing industry, but that achieving this objective must not make us lose sight of European interests linked to the possibility of sustainable fishing activities in Moroccan waters. From our standpoint, it is of vital importance that Community fishermen resume their activities at a level compatible with the obligation to guarantee sustainable resources. Consequently, we have reached a consensus to work together with a view to achieving a responsible partnership, and Morocco will give its views at a meeting to be held, as you have already pointed out, in Brussels, on 30 October, that is, on Monday.
Finally, let me stress that, if the European Union and Morocco hope to cooperate in the future, flexibility is needed on both sides, as extremist demands will lead us nowhere. It is clear that all our efforts are currently directed towards seeking an equitable agreement with Morocco. But the Commission, in consultation with the Member States primarily concerned, is also considering measures that could be taken to help the industry in question if no consensus is reached on a new partnership. The Commission is optimistic that it will be possible to establish a balanced partnership with Morocco. It states that it is, in any event, too early to predict the exact nature of the measures that would be taken if Morocco were to adopt a negative stance.
Mr President, Commissioner, tomorrow it will be exactly a year since our last debate here in Parliament on the subject of Morocco. It is hard to believe that a whole year has gone by. A great deal of water has flowed under the bridge since, and yet the agreement has expired and not been replaced. We hear talk of extremely difficult discussions and tough negotiations. So, here we are a year on, and we could almost be having the same debate. But that would get us nowhere. I had hoped that reason would prevail, apparently in vain.
Now we have the Commission's press release and Mr Busquin's announcement this morning. A Moroccan delegation will present its position in Brussels on 30 October. Commissioner Fischler has also confirmed this to me. Mind you, we are talking here about the Moroccan position. That will not bring the negotiations to an end. My question is, have they even begun? Or are we clutching at straws here? We held a special meeting of the Committee on Fisheries this week and passed a joint resolution intended to back up our oral question this morning and underpin our concern. My problem with the committee meeting and with the resolution itself is that we may be intervening in an ongoing procedure and, so far, we have not exactly learned anything new. Would we have done better to postpone? But then, do we have enough time? I understand full well the concerns of the Spanish and Portuguese fishermen who are affected. As a Member of the European Parliament from the German coast I can comprehend what the fishermen and their families, who have literally been high and dry for months, are going through.
A few weeks ago, I myself was in Algeciras on the southern coast of Spain, which is not far from Morocco. The boats were tied up in the harbours and the fishermen were reduced to idleness. They are dissatisfied and disappointed with Europe. The fact that the agreement has still not been renewed is having huge social and economic repercussions because it affects both the fishermen and over 20,000 employees in the processing industry. There is, however, one piece of good news: financial compensation has been extended to the end of this year, although it is just a drop in the ocean. Of course the agreement with Morocco is a political issue. And sensitivity and diplomacy do, of course, have their place in politics. Now is not the time, with hardly any light at the end of the tunnel, to start banging our fists on the table and making demands. I think we banged our fists on enough tables last year and should proceed with caution. Caution is the watchword. But do we still have enough time? Unfortunately negotiations are dragging on.
I would like to see the Commission and Parliament working together to get things moving. Would it be totally unreasonable here to call for the European Parliament to be directly involved in the negotiations? The importance of the agreement and its financial repercussions on the Community budget justify our involvement. If this is self-evident, why have we done nothing about it? Do things need to be hidden behind closed doors? I am most curious as to the latest developments, as to how the next few crucial days will turn out and as to what can or must be done to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion. I am tentatively expecting a fast and satisfactory outcome. I wish the Commissioner all the luck in the world and bid a very warm welcome to the Moroccan delegation.
Mr President, the absence of Mr Fischler from this debate is significant, but I consider the absence of Mr Smidt, the Director-General, to be even more so. I can understand the Commissioner' s reasons, but not those of the Director-General.
Mr Busquin, it is said that the Commission is a collegiate body. I, however, believe that if this really were the case, this difficult matter of the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco would have been addressed from the start with a global approach, involving all the Commissioners.
I doubt that until now you will have heard of this problem, which is to be presented in this debate in all its harshness. You will leave here today wiser and the only thing we would like is to leave more informed.
It is cold comfort that the European Union is financing compensation for fishermen and shipowners. From day one, what they have told us is that they wanted to fish. In any case, the aid will end on 31 December, the date planned for the conversion of the fleet.
What a beginning to the third millennium for the European Union: we are converting the fleet because we have been incapable of negotiating a new Fisheries Agreement with Morocco. Eleven months after the expiry of the previous agreement, nobody is assuring us that we will reach an agreement before 31 December. What has not been achieved in eleven months will be difficult to achieve in a few days.
Mr Busquin, I have sometimes, as a member of this Parliament, had the feeling that the European Commission, the Commissioner, and in particular the Director-General for Fisheries were acting as if they were ashamed of the sector and even of those Member States that they were called upon to represent in this negotiation. We all knew from the start that it was a difficult negotiation. Time has taught us that this could turn from being difficult to being impossible. Because contact cannot begin by turning our back on the demands of the sector and agreeing to Moroccan demands without any discussions.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 27 October 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you will be aware, last month saw the names of four more victims being added to the intolerable list of those who have lost their lives in Spain as a result of terrorist attacks by ETA. They were: Jos Francisco Querol Lombardero, a general and magistrate at the Supreme Court, Jess Escudero Garca, a policeman and Mr Querol' s bodyguard, Armando Medina, Mr Querol' s chauffeur, and Jess Snchez Martnez, a bus driver.
My thoughts are also with the many people who were injured in the attack in Madrid on 30 October. All we can do is reiterate our revulsion at this senseless violence and our total condemnation of it. I would ask you to observe one minute' s silence.
President. Many of them were very young. They were happily on their way to ski on the slopes in Austria when 155 of them died in appalling circumstances in the disaster on the Kaprun funicular. On behalf of this Parliament, I immediately sent to the President of Austria, Mr Thomas Klestil, and to the Chancellor, Mr Wolfgang Schssel, messages of condolence and support in the ordeal that a tragedy of this kind is for the victims, those close to them and the people of Austria as a whole.
In order to show the extent to which the whole of Europe empathises with the bereavement felt throughout one country in the Union, I have asked in these exceptional circumstances for the flags at the European Parliament to be flown at half mast today. I would invite you to dedicate your thoughts to this tragedy for one minute.
Madam President, I should like to thank you very much for extending your sympathies and condolences on the occasion of this terrible tragedy which we have just experienced. Many of these mainly young people boarded the train with the prospect of enjoying themselves, having fun and experiencing something positive, and they instead experienced a terrible and tragic death. I should like to thank you - I do not know whether anyone else will be speaking about this - on behalf of many Members of this House and, in any case, on behalf of my group and my delegation.
Madam President, may I take this opportunity, since you addressed this matter in such clear and sympathetic terms, to say that for this reason we can dispense with having a topical and urgent debate on this matter. I would ask you to understand that for this reason we do not really need to have the topical and urgent debate.
Madam President, allow me to thank you very much on behalf of my delegation for your message of sympathy which you sent on behalf of the European Parliament following the catastrophe at Kitzsteinhorn to our President, Dr Klestil, our Chancellor, Wolfgang Schssel, and thus to all the people of Austria. Thank you also for having the flags flown at half-mast. We are united in shock and grief for the 150 people who died and we share in the pain of their relatives. We extend our deepest sympathies to them. The great Austrian poet, Rainer Maria Rilke, once wrote that death is great and that we find ourselves in its laughing mouth. The burning inferno on the funicular railway - a railway which was considered to be one of the safest - which leads to one of the most beautiful areas of the Austrian Alps, makes everything else fade into the background, and the readiness to share pain and grief becomes our only comfort.
I would therefore consider it to be appropriate to commemorate the victims, who did not only come from my country but from many European countries and from overseas, in a minute' s silence, and I also think that we should dispense with a resolution on this matter.
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday 27 October have been distributed.
Madam President, our Minutes of the 27 October record our decision to pass a resolution about the Italian lettori and we were very grateful that the House carried it with such a large majority. In the meantime, Members of the House should know that the president of the association of the lettori was last week visited in his classroom by the anti-terrorist police to check if he was planning any violent demonstration against the Minister of Education. This would hardly count as a positive response to the resolution that we moved.
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents on Thursday 9 November, pursuant to Article 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
a) Sittings of 13 to 17 November 2000 Relating to Monday:
With regard to the report by Mr Ceyhun, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, I have received two requests: one request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for referral of this report to committee, and one request from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for deferral of this report to a later part-session.
I will now give the floor to Mr Ceyhun, who will speak in his capacity as rapporteur and on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
Madam President, this is a small amendment to the Minutes. In the modification of the agenda for Thursday the subject of the British submarine in Gibraltar was discussed and there were three speakers. The speeches by Mr Poettering and Mr Barn Crespo are faithfully recorded in the Minutes, showing that one requested and the other granted the political agreement from the Group of the Europe People' s Party for it to be included in the agenda for December. But there was a third speech, by Mr Galeote Quecedo, which does not feature in the Minutes. Only his name is given.
Allow me to give an explanation. This omission reflects fears, which in our opinion are unjustified, about anyone objectively reading the motion for a resolution that we are tabling, and this makes us fear that there could be further concealment in December. But, this is just an explanation. What I am asking for, with all due respect, is for Mr Galeote Quecedo' s speech to feature in the minutes.
Thank you, Mr Aparicio Snchez. We shall add Mr Galeote Quecedo' s statement to the Minutes.
Madam President, some of us expected an announcement from the chair yesterday about the Sakharov Prize - to whom it had been awarded, what the voting figures were and when it would be presented in plenary. Could you give us some information about that, either today or as soon as possible?
Mr Bethell, your point has nothing to do with the approval of the Minutes but I can, however, readily inform you that the Conference of Presidents voted to give this year' s Sakharov Prize to the 'Basta Ya' association. The prize will be awarded to the 'Basta Ya' association in the course of the December part-session.
The next item is the recommendation by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on approval of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (A5-0325/00).
Madam President, as a member of the European Parliament from Salzburg, allow me to start by thanking you for your words of acknowledgement and comfort yesterday. When the memorial service of what was the worst disaster to befall my country over recent years is held in Salzburg Cathedral on Friday, I know that this Parliament will be among the mourners and I thank you for your words of sympathy and comfort for the relatives.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, after nine months' work and a long struggle for consensus, we now have a draft European Charter of Fundamental Rights. Today is the day we have to say 'yes' or 'no' to this Charter and your rapporteurs recommend that plenary adopt and vote in favour of this Charter of Fundamental Rights. This recommendation is born of a firm conviction. Like many of you, I too regret that we are only allowed to say yes or no and are unable to send the Council any other political message which might have been called for in this context in order to express the critical support of this House for the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is but a first step and is still a far cry from what Parliament demanded of this political project in March of this year.
What we must also remember here is what gives this Charter its value, assuming that it is adopted. I think that it grants one initial fundamental right, one unwritten fundamental right and that is people's right to know their rights. This fundamental right has now been granted. Vague formulations and legal principles have given way to a clear system of fundamental rights which is binding on all the EU institutions and whenever European law is applied by the Member States. The value of this Charter is that it has transformed rights vested in international law - vested but not binding, vested but not enforceable, vested but not guaranteed - into legal principles, nay into the constitutional principles of the Union itself, setting up a dynamic process which will surely end one day with a legally binding Charter of Fundamental Rights.
What has revolutionised the debate and the history of fundamental and human rights is that, for the first time, social rights have been listed in this Charter on a par with traditional human rights and traditional principles; no Member State has ever done that in its list of fundamental rights. This Charter is also the expression of a common set of basic values for all the candidate countries, for all the countries wishing to join the European Union, and it is precisely in the area of social rights that it sends candidate countries a clear message that they must comply with these social standards.
It marks - and I am firmly convinced of this, even if many Heads of State and Government prefer not to admit it - the beginning of the constitutional process which this Parliament has called for so often and with such persistence. I am certain that, with this Charter of Fundamental Rights, we have laid the foundation stone for a future European constitution and constitutional process. I think that is reason enough for us to adopt this Charter, even though there are points at which it may be hard to accept that many rights, many basic rights which Parliament demanded for the people of Europe, and with good cause, have been left out of the Charter. It is hard to see why the right to a fair wage has been left out and why we came up against insurmountable resistance when it came to the right to a decent minimum standard of living, the right to work and the right to housing. This Charter will, I think, need to be supplemented in the future, if it is to become the foundation stone of a European constitution. But that should not deter us from taking this first decisive step.
I hope that, even though it can only say yes to this Charter of Fundamental Rights, Parliament will clearly apprise the Council of its demand for this Charter to be made legally binding over coming weeks, so that it can open the way to the European Court of Justice for the citizens of Europe. I hope that this House will emphasise these demands by a large majority in its resolution on Nice.
That is all I have to say. I should just like, if you will allow, firstly to thank my co-rapporteur for his committed approach and the vast amount of remarkable work which he carried out and secondly, to thank you for your support.
Madam President, whatever one felt about the mandate from the Cologne European Council, it was fairly surprising that the convention set up to draft the Charter fully succeeded in achieving the mandate. We faced an extraordinarily complex task for the inscription of fundamental rights and freedoms found inside the constitutional traditions of Member States and also within the general principles of Union law.
In my opinion the convention managed to strike a sound balance between self-restraint and aspiration. We refrained from superseding the Treaties but maximised their impact by making the relationship between the citizen and the Union for the first time clear and visible. Some people will be disappointed that the Charter was unable to go further but it is of course a compromise forged in the crucible of the convention and it represents a balance between competing political tendencies, nationalities and cultures.
That balance commanded a broad consensus inside the convention and should do so too inside the European Parliament. Parliament played a strong part is formulating the Charter. We profited from participating strongly in the process and the citizens we represent will profit from its solemn proclamation especially as Article 52.3 says the Union can then proceed to grant more extensive protection of European fundamental rights as European integration proceeds.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to join the European Parliament in expressing the Presidency' s sympathies on the occasion of the accident which occurred near Salzburg in Austria, and say that we fully share in the sorrow of the families of the victims of this most serious accident.
The next item is the presentation of the Court of Auditor' s annual report for 1999.
I welcome the President of the Court of Auditors, Mr Karlsson, and I immediately give him the floor.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Members of the Court of Auditors I would like to thank you all for inviting me to present the 23rd Annual Report of the Court. As in previous years, this presentation marks the start of the discharge procedure for the 1999 financial year.
The report follows the format used for the past two years with chapters covering revenue in each of the expenditure areas under the headings of the Financial Perspective. You will also find a chapter dedicated to the Statement of Assurance, and attached to the report you will find the Court's observations on implementation of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds.
The different chapters of the annual report address four main concerns. Firstly, there is an analysis of the budgetary implementation of the budgetary management practices within the specific financial headings. You will find that the Court has paid more attention to the follow-up to previous observations, in response to the demands expressed by this Parliament. In each of the chapters the Court reports on the progress made in a number of areas on which it had reported in the past and I will return to some of these issues in my presentation.
Thirdly, in response to the request of the European Parliament, the Court has expanded its audit work on the Statement of Assurance and now provides additional information per area of expenditure in each chapter. Finally, in each of the chapters the Court presents a number of other key audit findings. Many of these findings are also reported upon in more detail in the Court's special reports.
Since the last discharge procedure the Court has adopted 24 special reports containing the results of audits which focus on a wide range of specific areas in which the Community's financial management can be improved. Although these reports are not part of today's presentation, they are to be taken into account in the discharge procedure.
The total income for the 1999 financial year amounted to EUR 86.9 billion. The gross national product-based resources represent 43% of this total. The value added tax-based resources represent 36% and the traditional own resources are 15% of the total. The remaining 5% is composed of the surplus resources of the previous year and other income. This means that four fifths of the Community resources, the gross national product plus the value added tax-based resources, are calculated and fixed by using statistical data.
I would like to point out two major observations of the Court in this context. First, for several years now, the Court has commented on the use of a statistical aggregated system (SEC79), which for all other purposes has already been replaced by a newer system (SEC95). The difference is 16 years. Further, in the context of the fight against VAT fraud, the Court has identified a method based on a comparison between fiscal and statistical intermediate consumption data that can be particularly useful in pointing to areas where the risk of fiscal fraud is high. It therefore invites the Member States to consider the use of this method.
In the customs area the Court reports on the complexity and variable application of the outward processing procedure. However, it also supports the Commission's proposal to modernise customs arrangements with an economic impact.
With regard to the 1999 expenditure, a total amount of EUR 93.6 billion was entered into the account as new commitments, and payments amounting to EUR 80.3 billion were recorded. This is 96% and 92% respectively of the available appropriations for the year. The utilisation rates of the Financial Perspective estimates are 91% and 83% respectively.
Expenditure from the Community budget is spread over many different areas. It is, therefore, difficult to draw general conclusions on this budgetary implementation. However, the Court makes the following major points. Half of the 1999 expenses are recorded under the common agricultural policy. As reported in chapter 2 of this annual report, the high rate of expenditure, which is almost 99% of final appropriations, is explained in part by numerous transfers that reflect in fact the poor quality of the initial estimates, of both revenue and expenditure. The Court invites both the Commission and the Member States to improve the quality of these estimates.
There were also numerous transfers of appropriations for the Structural Funds that significantly altered the structure of the 1999 budget. Further, there were major differences between programme amounts and the amounts allocated by the Financial Perspective and the majority of Structural Fund interventions had to be rescheduled. In this area there was also an under-utilisation of commitment and payment appropriations and a concentration of transactions at the end of the year.
In areas where the Community programmes are implemented directly by the Commission, such as internal policy and external actions, implementation rates are somewhat lower. There is also a heavy concentration of commitments and payments at the end of the year. This is something that we have come back to over the years.
The Court repeats, consequently, its comments of previous years on the negative effects of this, for instance poor and hasty decisions, heavy workload creating a risk of errors and so on.
Finally, in both the chapters on internal policies and external actions, the Court finds that the Commission's own comments on budgetary implementation are inadequate. The Court welcomes, therefore, the clear commitment of the Commission's answer to improve fundamentally its budgetary and accounting report.
The Court has produced an annual Statement of Assurance since the 1994 budgetary year. Each year the Court has expressed serious criticism of the legality and regularity of the payments and the transactions underlying them. This is the case once again. Indeed, the audit of the 1999 payments revealed once again an unacceptable incidence of error which affected their amount or the reality or the eligibility of the transactions underlying them.
The majority of these errors occurred in areas of the Community budget that are managed by the authorities in the Member States. They mainly comprise non-compliance with eligibility rules, overclaims, insufficient justification and calculation errors.
There are also other failures to comply with regulations and systems weaknesses for which the effects on payments cannot be directly evaluated but which increase the risks of errors occurring. The most frequent examples here are problems in implementing regulatory control checks insufficiently, detailed supporting documentation and failure to comply with tender procedures.
Thus, for 1999, the Court did not obtain the necessary evidence from its audit activities to ensure that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, except for own resources, commitments and administrative expenditure.
On the other hand, for the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Fund, the Court gives a positive statement of assurance. Not only is it the duty of the Court to report on the errors found in its audits but we should also ensure that our audit findings are interpreted and used correctly. Therefore, let me remind Members of Parliament that the high incidence of errors found by the Court cannot, and must not, be seen as an indication of the level of fraud affecting the Community budget.
Most of the payment errors found by the Court are due to problems of inadequate financial management and control and it is only in the case of a small proportion of the errors found that further reinvestigation by OLAF or the Member States' authorities is justified. Another risk of misrepresentation is that the objectives for corrective actions are set in terms of diminishing error rates and obtaining a positive statement of assurance. As the Court already pointed out in its previous report, a medium-term improvement requires a combination of general and specific measures, including the clarification and improvement of control procedures, particularly at the level of Member States. In this context, the Court welcomes the Commission's plan for improving financial management presented to the discharge authority in the context of the discharge for 1998.
This reflection leads me to some comments on the reform of the Commission. The Court welcomes the efforts of the Prodi Commission to build a modern and robust structure of management and control and, at the same time, to focus on the way political priorities are set and resources allocated.
Many of the weaknesses that the Commission now seeks to overcome have been emphasised by the Court on many occasions. For instance, the proposals of the Commission to increase the responsibility of authorising officers for the execution of commitments and payments while bringing to an end the centralised system of prior approval of transactions by the financial controller, together with the creation of an independent internal audit service, is in line with the key requirement for improved financial management that we lay down in our Opinion No 4/97.
Another element of the reform that corresponds closely to a key priority identified by the Court is the increased focus to be placed on results and performance measurement within a framework of resource allocation that is consistent with predetermined priorities and objectives that are clearly defined and measurable.
At sector level, the Commission has now announced reform programmes which can be seen as a response to concerns expressed by the Court over a number of years, for example, the proposals for improving the management of external aid programmes. This initiative is clearly based on an analysis very similar to that of the Court - most comprehensively set out in its Annual Report for 1997.
Whereas the Court encourages the Commission to proceed from principles to practice as quickly as is feasible, it needs to be recalled that, as yet, much of the reform is still on paper only. The implementation of this new reform will need a genuine change of the management culture of the Commission, a process that will certainly take time.
The Annual Report 1999, when reporting upon the follow-up of previous observations, shows how difficult it is for the Commission to implement the needed changes which have been agreed upon. In some cases, such as the reforms of the measures for the subsidised use of skimmed milk and skimmed milk powder or the programme of assistance to South Africa, as well as in certain areas of traditional own resources, the Commission has taken actions to remedy specific weaknesses reported upon by the Court.
Let us resume our session. I should explain to you that there appears to be a gremlin in the system somewhere in the building. The people who installed the system have been here for some time trying to find out where the problem is. It seems to be an intermittent problem. I hope it can be resolved as soon as possible.
The Minutes of the previous day's sitting have been distributed. Are there any comments?
Mr President, on page 27 of the annex to the Minutes my vote is recorded as having been cast in favour of Amendment No 20 to the Morillon report. I do not subscribe to the views of that amendment and I would wish that my vote be recorded as having been cast against it.
That will be put in order in the next Minutes, Mr Watson.
Mr President, on behalf of Mrs van der Laan and myself I want to register that we voted against Amendment No 15 in the Morillon report. We want to be registered as voting in favour of the release of Leyla Zana and the other Kurdish prisoners.
Mr President, it might be helpful if I could make a procedural point on this matter. Yesterday my group, as in so many votes in this House, were on automatic pilot, but some of us rather crash-landed, as we discovered, in the vote in respect of Amendment No 15, which was from the GUE Group and called for the release of Mrs Zana and others. We had voted the wrong way.
I have already had a correction made but I would ask you formally to facilitate through the day the possibility for colleagues in the ELDR Group to contact sessional services. Some are not here now, partly because of the interruption and partly because the issue had not been foreseen. I would welcome your assistance in the matter.
Mr President, what I have to say concerns rather the future than the past, in other words, I would just like to make sure that we are to vote on the BSE issue in today' s vote. This is a very important matter for the public, and one that is of interest to them, and it would be only right to get a decision on the matter this afternoon.
Public access to documents of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission
The next item is the report (A5-0318/2000) by Mr Cashman on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents [COM(2000) 30 - C5-0057/2000 - 2000/0032(COD)].
I have the honour to present this report on a subject that is crucial to the lives of the people we represent and, indeed, to the future of the Union. My aim throughout the report has been to produce a proposal which is politically mature, eminently reasonable and practical for both the institutions and the citizen. I believe my report reflects that and the view of my fellow rapporteur, Mrs Maij-Weggen, to whom I pay special tribute.
Let me stress that this is a legal text; it must be detailed and watertight. It is not an information pamphlet. That will come later. However, I regret that the report has been misrepresented by some for short-term political gain. A few cheap headlines, a few inches of print remove such people from reality. This report is even more urgent in light of the rules which were adopted by the Council in August, the so-called 'Solana Decision' . My report specifically states that the August Decision should be repealed along with other decisions.
What we are seeking is a change of culture. As a collection of 15 Member States we approach the issue of public access to documents differently, but I am glad to see that, largely, the European Parliament stands as a bulwark against the forces which seek to keep the doors of the institutions closed to the public. Access to documents and information regarding the activities of the institutions enables citizens to hold the EU governing bodies accountable and stimulates greater efficiency. I remain confident that, with the crucial input of Mrs Maij-Weggen, we have produced a mature and sensible text and introduced revolutionary changes for the institutions, but also real and tangible benefits for the European citizens.
It is clear that Article 255 of the Treaty permits a broader interpretation of citizens' access to documents of the institutions, so allow me to outline some of the changes in my report. All the institutions and bodies covered by Article 255 should be expressly stated in the regulation and should include not only committees and working groups, but all agencies created by the institutions. All documents of the institutions should be public unless there is good reason why they should not be - based on a harm test and on a limited number of exceptions. These exceptions are discretionary, not as others would have you believe, mandatory.
The term 'document' should be interpreted widely and must include internal documents of the institutions, although information documents, the 'space to think' , can be excluded. As in the Commission proposal, a register of documents should be established. It should contain documents which are directly accessible. It should also include documents which are classified as 'non public' with the exception that applies. That way, the public knows of the documents and can challenge such classification. Furthermore, access to documents must be user-friendly via the Internet or traditional methods and there will be ongoing scrutiny - extremely important - of the new process and implementation by Parliament.
I would like to clarify some other aspects. The classification system outlined in my report is intended to make the process of access to documents easier. An application for a document would challenge the application of the exception. At the time of the request for a document, the application of the exception must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. What we must ensure is that the existing or future interinstitutional agreements, referred to in my report, have as their legal basis the Article 255 rule in order to ensure that a coherent framework is agreed between the institutions, with the maximum right of access for the citizen.
Some Members have suggested that in my text I come too close to the Council and Commission view. In fact, the fundamental problems which the Council and Commission foresee with my report are, interestingly enough, the very same differences apparent between the majority of Parliament and some of the smaller groups in this House. Therefore, I urge the Council and Commission to embrace the change. The Union must move closer to the citizen. It must be more accountable and more transparent, especially as we approach enlargement. Together we must seize this opportunity and together solve the problems that it poses. I urge the House to support my report.
Mr President, it was a long time before the European Commission submitted a proposal in the field of openness of government. A number of MEPs had been asking for one for years. At the beginning of this part-session I even submitted a complete proposed initiative to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs. The latter then announced that it would produce a concrete proposal within six months, and it has kept its word.
It is just a shame that the content was not what we had expected it to be. There has been a fair amount of criticism on the part of the journalist organisations, the NGOs, a number of Member States and also Parliament. It therefore comes as no surprise that there is a broad package of amendments, so broad in fact that the regulation is being adapted to a quite considerable extent. Adapted to the legislation on openness of government in a number of Member States, but also to the Freedom of Information Act of the kind in force in the United States. After all, why would we want to give our European citizens less openness with regard to Brussels than the Americans get with regard to Washington?
Mr President, the French version of the Minutes for yesterday' s sitting state, on page 14, that we were to come back this morning to my request to postpone the voting on the Villiers report.
I think the time has now come to do so. I proposed that we vote on the Villiers report in Brussels in November, because there are a number of rather sensitive amendments that I should not like to see voted in by random majorities.
That is something we shall discuss presently. For the moment our business is to adopt the Minutes.
Once again, Mr President, yesterday I requested that the vote on Mrs Villiers' report be postponed. It is a very important report which deserves better than to be discussed in an almost empty Chamber. I do regret the fact that some Members see fit to avoid turning up to the Friday sitting in Strasbourg, but since it does happen, if we go ahead and vote today, the outcome is likely to be based on the will of a random majority, which does no credit to this House either.
The procedure requires us to hear the opinion of the Members of the House on this proposal. We shall hear one speaker for the motion and one against.
Mr President, I would like to speak in favour of Mr Goebbels' proposal. I leave this matter to the House. It is for you to decide whether you would like to postpone or not. Fridays in Strasbourg are a difficult issue for us, but today because of the sensitivity of the report - it raises issues about the general procedure of the House and our general relationship with the Commission - I personally think it would be better if the groups had an opportunity to vote when there were more Members present.
I am sorry that there are not more Members present this morning. I would not ask this if I did not think that this was an important report which requires the attendance of more Members because we are taking important decisions.
I know that Fridays are a sensitive issue, so I leave it to the House. But I personally would appeal to you to vote to postpone the vote on this report.
Now that we have heard from the rapporteur, we shall have one speaker in support of the motion, and one against.
Mr President, I came into politics in the hope of persuading people by argument and occasionally winning votes. One way to win a vote is to turn up when your opponents do not. If they are prevented by some unavoidable catastrophe that is a breach of democracy, but if they do not bother coming, they do not deserve the vote. It is not the House that disenfranchises these voters, it is the Members who are not here.
Mr President, this is an issue of principle. Nor did Mrs Villiers agree this with our group. I nonetheless agree with Mrs Villiers that this is an important report. But, important though it is, it can still be voted upon on a Friday morning.
There is now just one more Friday sitting to come, namely in December. I was against doing away with the Friday sittings. However, that is something people have to sort out for themselves. As long as we are in fact here in Strasbourg on Fridays, though, it is a full working day.
I would ask the whole of the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, as well as Mrs Villiers, to vote against postponement to the November II part-session. That has not been agreed with my group. Nor is it in order. I would therefore ask that we vote here and now.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 17 November 2000.
Many Members of the House wanted us to commemorate the hundredth anniversary of Mr Gaetano Martino' s birth.
It is my great honour today to pay tribute to the memory of this great European, whose name is inextricably linked to the Messina Conference which, in 1955, paved the way for the European Community.
Mr Gaetano Martino was an illustrious doctor and politician. He was a credit to the European Parliament as a Member for ten years, and was twice elected President of Parliament in the 1960s.
His presidency of Parliament crowned a long political career which led him to hold high office firstly in the Italian National Parliament and then within the Italian Government, where he was, in turn, Minister for National Education and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
As a Minister and as a Member of the European Parliament, he fought a particularly bold campaign in favour of the European University Institute in Florence.
Indeed, he considered Europe' s shared foundations to be both cultural and spiritual.
From the very outset, the construction of Europe proved to be a difficult road, strewn with obstacles, which Mr Gaetano Martino, however, with the support of his deep-seated humanist culture and his unwavering faith in Europe, successfully negotiated. This is illustrated by the fact that, on 1 June 1955, i.e. less than a year after the failure of the ambitious plan for a European Defence Community, he started to weave the fabric of unification anew by proposing the Messina Conference which became, as we all know, the wellspring for the 1957 Treaties of Rome. So the European engine, which had just about stalled, suddenly came to life and the common market became a reality.
We have decided to publish Gaetano Martino' s collected speeches in a single volume. They are truly edifying for young people who did not live through the difficult post-war period. In 1958, speaking from the chair in Strasbourg, he made the following declaration, "For the first time in the history of this continent which has been marked by wars more than by peace we are witnesses to the general unification of the economy. The future is thereby assured, and the prospect is taking shape of a great Community embracing people of different languages, customs and beliefs, with this Parliament as one of the institutional bodies."
Ladies and gentlemen, a few days away from the European Council in Nice, I can only express the wish that the legacy of Gaetano Martino and the Messina spirit continue to be a source of inspiration for us all, especially all those who are responsible for the future destiny of this continent.
Ladies and gentlemen, like all of you, I am sure, I would have liked to have been able to open this part-session without having to announce further news of the latest victims of ETA terrorism.
Unfortunately, our democracies have been sent a new message of violence in the form of the particularly heinous murder of Ernest Lluch.
On 22 November, the very day of the 25th anniversary of the coronation of King Juan Carlos, which paved the way to democracy in Spain, one of the key figures in this democracy has, in turn, paid with his life for his belief in freedom, tolerance and respect for the rights of others.
He was Health Minister for your country in your government, Mr Barn Crespo. In the 1960s, you fought together, Mr Colom i Naval, for democracy in Spain. Known as a key player in the Spanish transition to democracy and for his contribution to Catalonia' s autonomous status, loved for his warmth, respected for his qualities as a politician and a great academic, Ernest Lluch was targeted by his murderers purely because of his dedication to the rule of law.
I should like to express my deepest sympathy to his family and friends and to all those in Spain who believe in the strength of democracy.
Approximately a million Spanish citizens, of all political persuasions, have stood up to protest against this despicable murder. The European Parliament has a duty to let them know that we stand with them, and so I propose, once again, that we observe a minute' s silence to express our solidarity and deep feeling.
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday, 17 November have been distributed.
We shall deal with procedural motions after the debate on the Nice Summit, as you have requested. You are aware that we have a very full agenda and I have therefore taken this decision by virtue of the powers accorded me under the Rules of Procedure in order to ensure the smooth running of parliamentary business. So please keep them safe until then.
The next item is the joint debate on the Council and Commission statements on maritime safety and the following reports:
Report (A5-0343/2000) by Mr Watts, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95/21/EC concerning the enforcement, in respect of shipping using Community ports and sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States, of international standards for ship safety, pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions (port state control) [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0174/2000 - 2000/0065(COD)]
Report (A5-0344/2000) by Mr Hatzidakis, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the accelerated phasing-in of double-hull or equivalent design standards for single-hull oil tankers [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0173/2000 - 2000/0067(COD)]
Report (A5-0342/2000) by Mr Ortuondo Larrea, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 94/57/EC on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0175/2000-2000/0066(COD)]
Report (A5-0336/2000) by Mrs McKenna, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision setting up a Community framework for cooperation in the field of accidental or deliberate marine pollution [C50501/2000 - 1998/0350(COD)]
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I was especially keen to be with you today for the debate in the European Parliament on the first maritime package because you are about to examine three important texts which are a vital step in an issue which recent events have unfortunately made into headline news.
The European Union has 60 000 km of coastline bordering some of the busiest seas and oceans in the world. The importance of maritime matters to Europe is undeniable but that also gives Europe a tremendous responsibility. Since the Erika accident last December, considerable work has been done within our European institutions in order to move forwards. In this connection, the first package of measures proposed by the Commission in March has been examined by Parliament and by the Council. A second package of measures is expected in the near future. The European Council in Biarritz examined this issue, and it will again be an important subject at the Nice Summit.
On the occasion of each disaster, the people of Europe express their anger at the lack of maritime safety and at the risks posed by the dozens of ships transporting toxic or hazardous substances which sail the waters off our shorelines on a daily basis. I believe we ought to understand their emotion and their anger. Naturally, we want to ensure that things move forward. How can we accept maritime transport, which is vital for our trade and commerce, being developed to the detriment of environmental and human safety? How can we accept that more and more ships, increasingly larger in scale and increasingly automated, ply the waters off our coasts without always respecting the strict safety, navigational control and social rules, after the fashion of land and air transport?
What we can no longer accept is the logic which makes the quest for the lowest price the operational rule of maritime transport. What we can no longer accept, what we must no longer accept, is the connivance of certain States, which we know to exist, which register some of the oldest and most corroded ships, sometimes for just a few dollars. What we cannot and must not accept are the shipowners and operators who deploy underqualified and underpaid crews, classification societies which, for fear of losing a client, pay scant regard to the quality of the ships and their crews, and charterers who seek, above all, to reduce their costs.
I am told, especially in France, that stringent national measures must be adopted to protect French coasts: it has also been proposed that French coastguards should be deployed. But the Erika and the Ievoli Sun were not French ships. Their owners and their classification societies were not French, and they were both sailing in international waters when they sank. Hence, even though each State has to assume its own responsibilities, decisions must be taken on a broader scale, at least on a European scale. To achieve this, the Members of the European Parliament not only have a role to play - and I am well aware of their determination to do so - but, even more importantly, they are crucial in pushing forward Community regulations as far and as quickly as possible.
The people of Europe have woken up. We see this in the case of animal meal and mad cow disease. They are now challenging us; they are challenging international institutions and are calling on them to be effective. If a new accident, a new shipwreck, occurs tomorrow off the coasts of Europe, we will all be justifiably denounced for our shortcomings, given these inadequate rules. Personally, I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, Madam President, that the fact that we are examining these proposals today is living proof that the European Parliament is an effective institution, which can take on board the concerns of our citizens speedily and effectively. That is why I am delighted that, under the impetus of the European Parliament, the Commission and the Council, significant progress is about to be made towards bringing about a truly safer maritime Europe.
The fact is that, on the basis of proposals we made last February, the European Commission put forward its own proposals with the greatest alacrity. Today, you are examining these three texts in first reading. I recognise that the European Parliament and its rapporteurs are motivated by an unshakeable will to see the rapid adoption of texts that are binding and effective in terms of maritime safety. I also recognise that we share the same objective of improving maritime safety and the same analytical approach to the methods of achieving this. I also recognise, as do the rapporteurs, that the technical aspects of the texts relating to classification societies and to port state control may need to be gone into more deeply.
The question arises as to whether the fact that there is a new part-session of Parliament in December will make it possible for any residual problems to be solved. This may also enable the Council Presidency to have discussions with the Member States with a view to obtaining the Council' s approval of your proposals and to adopting the text at first reading, if necessary by qualified majority voting. We could seek the broadest consensus on the system of liability of classification societies, on toughening up the system of banning the worst offending black-listed flag states, on introducing on-board black boxes, and on putting in place immediate inspections for ships posing the highest risks.
As regards this fundamental text on enhancing maritime safety and eliminating single-hull oil tankers, we can already congratulate ourselves on the work that has been carried out by the European Parliament. If this text is adopted, as I believe your rapporteur will propose, it will make it possible to phase out more than a third of single-hull oil tankers by 2005 and the remaining two thirds by 2010. This is a considerable achievement and it should make it possible for the dangerous ships sailing off our coasts to be speedily replaced and to ensure the greatest level of safety.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, rapporteurs, as you see, here we have the opportunity to enhance the safety of maritime transport. We all know that these measures, which you are going to be debating today, are inadequate. The Heads of State and Government highlighted the urgent need to examine a second package of proposals relating to the supervision and transparency of maritime transport and to the establishment of a European agency, and to making all actors involved in the maritime transport of hazardous or toxic substances aware of their responsibilities. What is more, on this occasion France reaffirmed the need to set in motion a Community project on the training and working conditions of seamen, and I know that some of you also share this concern.
As you can see, it seems to me that the determination of all Community institutions is decisive, and I am convinced this determination is total. It is starting to bear fruit here in Brussels, in the European Parliament: so that only safe, sound ships with trained crews living and working under normal conditions are authorised to sail, so that, at last, responsibility falls to each of the actors involved in maritime transport, so that the rules of maritime transport evolve with due regard to the coastal State' s right and its aspiration to protect its environment.
Madam President, I believe it is beyond doubt that the Commission, like the French Presidency considers the question of maritime safety and environmental protection to be of extreme importance. In fact, it has been among the highest priority items on the Commission's agenda ever since the fatal sinking of the Erika 11 months ago. Even more recently, only some weeks ago, another tanker, this time a chemical one, the Ievoli Sun sank off the coast of France. Once again we were reminded of the potential disastrous consequences of such accidents.
The European public no longer tolerates oil spills or other environmental disasters caused by industrial accidents in shipping or otherwise. Indeed, citizens have the right to expect that ships are safe and that they can transport their cargo in an environmentally acceptable way without endangering the life and economy of people living on nearby coasts. Let me say that I saw the effects of the Erika accident myself whilst visiting the site and I know that it takes a very long time and a lot of manpower and, of course, money to clean up. The effects are disastrous. It is evident that, because of geography, it will always be the same regions that suffer the risks of maritime oil transports, despite the fact that the benefits of such transports are enjoyed by the Union as a whole.
We have taken this message very seriously indeed and it is exceptional that the Commission has acted so quickly and so consistently with six different legislative proposals within a year covering very different issues. All lie at the very heart of the regulations of shipping as a whole and I want to remind you that, in addition to the three proposals which are to be discussed here today, the 'Erika II' package, as Mr Gayssot has already mentioned, will be put on the table next week. This set of measures will propose the creation of a European maritime safety agency, a new European system for the adequate compensation of oil pollution victims and a new traffic surveillance system for EU waters.
This swift and focused approach resulting in the two 'Erika' packages and six proposals has created an enormous momentum. I believe it is fair to say that only after the Erika disaster did Member States and the international maritime community fully understand and feel the determination of the European institutions to improve maritime safety. They have realised that the determination remains even if such actions involve friction between the EU and the international maritime institutions and tension with the economic interests of the maritime industry.
Now that there are Commission proposals on the table we must not lose this momentum and forget the issue until the next accident happens. In order to make a real change for maritime safety, the three institutions, but in particular the two co-legislators, must adopt the texts. Legislation alone is not enough. Member States must also ensure that they have the proper means to implement it, in particular I am thinking of the necessary recruitment of port state control inspectors. Otherwise the benefit of the exercise will not be what the public expects from us. On behalf of the Commission, I can assure you that it is our clear intention not to spare any effort to make ships safer and our seas cleaner, both next year and in the years to come. This goes for all sectors of maritime transport.
I wish to conclude by thanking Mr Gayssot, President of the Transport Council of Ministers, for his encouraging comments. We hope and expect that the Transport Council, on 21 December, will add their part to the common determination among the European institutions to bring about a real improvement in maritime safety by the adoption of common positions on all three texts. The Commission is not ready to accept any compromise just for the sake of achieving a compromise.
Finally, I wish to thank this House and in particular the rapporteurs, Mr Hatzidakis, Mr Ortuondo Larrea, Ms McKenna and Mr Watts, for their understanding of the importance of the first 'Erika' package which is evidenced by the excellent work already done in such a limited time, and for the generally good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission in the field of maritime safety.
Madam President, in a few days time Europe will mark the first anniversary of the loss of the oil tanker, Erika. Since then, sadly, there have been many other disasters at sea, we know only too well. Before the Erika sank, many other ships sank as well, with the loss of oil, other cargoes, or tragically, the loss of lives of crew or passengers.
The lesson for this Parliament this morning must be that we have to conclude that maritime laws throughout the world are in a state of shambles and we have to begin the process of putting them right. In that context, I wish to pay tribute to the Commission for bringing forward this 'Erika' package to try and right some of those wrongs, to try and prevent another Erika occurring. We also pay tribute to the French Presidency, in particular the minister, for his determination to ensure that, in a very brief period of time, we truly learn the lessons of the Erika and make sure that they are applied to prevent an Erika-type disaster occurring again. Without the minister' s determination, without the determination of the French Presidency, the IMO's working committee would not have agreed with us that single-hull tankers should be phased out rapidly throughout the world. So I pay particular tribute to them for that achievement, which I hope is confirmed by the full IMO assembly very soon.
The main problem throughout the world is not the lack of maritime laws but the lack of the willingness of countries throughout the world to enforce them. For example, I am afraid that the whole history of port state control is the lack of willingness of Member States within the European Union and beyond to implement port state control adequately. That is why we welcome the amendment to the directive because it gives us the ability to make sure people implement the port state control Directive effectively. However, in my view as rapporteur, the proposal from the Commission simply does not go far enough. It is not strong enough. In our view, if implemented, the Commission's proposal would allow another Erika to occur. That is why this morning we cannot agree with the Commission's proposal but we are putting forward four proposals which we believe will significantly strengthen the proposal and would therefore secure this Parliament's support.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 30 November 2000.
The next item is the final draft agenda agreed by the Conference of Presidents on Thursday, 7 December, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
Madam President, firstly, please allow me to express, on my own behalf - although I believe I am expressing the opinion of the majority of the House and not just of my group - that I agree absolutely with the statement that you made at the time of the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. I believe that it is right to point out that this is of constitutional value to Parliament and I therefore congratulate you.
Secondly, Madam President, I would like to ask you to explain to the House as clearly as possible, given the amount of contradictory information which has accumulated throughout the day, what the structure of the debate with the French Presidency will be in relation to the Nice European Council, and what approach will be taken to the participation of the President-in-Office of the Council.
The reports are certainly contradictory, Mr Barn Crespo. Presumably all the more so because the Summit ended in the middle of the night, which nobody had planned.
I shall try to clarify the position. I was told before the Summit that the President of the Republic would attend together with the Foreign Minister. That is what I was told, but I shall seek more up-to-date information and I shall pass on your message.
Madam President, thank you very much for taking the trouble to do this. Our information - and I wish to add straight away that I really cannot believe it - is that the President-in-Office of the Council, the President of France, will only be present tomorrow for 30 minutes in order to speak. He may also hear Romano Prodi's intervention, I do not know, but he would not hear the remarks of the group Chairmen. If that were the case then I would judge this procedure to be unacceptable, and it would meet with criticism from the vast majority of our group.
I am pleased that the other groups also agree. I hope that this information is wrong, but I would ask you to convey to the French President that it is completely unacceptable for him to come here into Parliament simply to make a speech and then to take his leave and not listen to what this democratically elected European Parliament has to say.
Madam President, I strongly agree with those remarks. I would invite you to convey to the French Presidency the view of my own group that a draft treaty which is worth promoting should be a draft treaty which is worth defending.
Madam President, an issue has arisen in relation to the possible tabling of a resolution on the Nice European Council. My group' s understanding is that the Conference of Presidents did not take any decision in this regard and that the debate will be without a motion for a resolution.
I would be grateful if you could confirm this view.
It is not what the Group of the Party of European Socialists wants. There was no agreement at the Conference of Presidents. So they decided to wait and I would like that point clarified.
You are right to want to do so, because for once, as you know, I could not attend the Conference of Presidents. I was at the European Council at that very time.
Mr President, a rather serious problem arose this morning when the assistants were suddenly prevented from boarding the coach to bring us here from the Hotel Monopol, despite the fact that this practice has been applied without a hitch for the past 21 years. I should like to protest because there would have been five members in the coach and the assistants would have been late for work. It is a stupid regulation because the bus carrying five passengers could have been replaced by two cars, meaning that there would have been two drivers instead of one. This bureaucracy must have been thought up by our quaestors and we urgently need to abolish it so that members can take their assistants with them to work.
Mr Posselt, we will pass on your arguments to the College of Quaestors so that they can adopt the resolution that they think best and so that it will be known to all Members.
Mr President, I just wished to point out that I forgot to sign the attendance register yesterday evening.
Mr Varela, chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, has the floor to give his opinion.
Varela Suanzes-Carpegna (PPE-DE), chairman of the Committee on Fisheries. (ES) Mr President, I would like to inform you that the Committee on Fisheries has decided not to accept this request for urgent procedure, as we were not aware of the Commission proposal until 20 November, when we no longer had time to include it on our agenda. It was therefore not possible for us to deal with it with the urgency that was asked of us.
However, we will do everything we can to ensure that we will be able to debate it here in the next part-session of the new year.
Thank you very much, Mr Varela. As there are no other speakers, the Commissioner has the floor.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. the regulation on control measures in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the north-east Atlantic fisheries stipulates that the provisions governing the application of these control measures only apply for the year 2000. The Council was unable to agree on a longer regulation at the time and the rules in question therefore expire at the end of this year.
If we delay in amending this regulation, we shall have no legal basis for European Union control ships in the international waters of the north Atlantic after 1 January 2001. This will undermine the whole control system and the regional fisheries organisations, which will be weakened as a result. The control system has proven to be a first rate system and we should spare no effort to strengthen and develop it further. The Commission therefore supports the Council's request for urgent procedure and calls on the members of the European Parliament to support this urgent procedure.
Mr Varela, chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, the committee responsible, has the floor again.
Mr President, I regret very much that the Commission did not take all this into account before and did not inform us in sufficient time so that we could work on it in committee. However, the international measures mentioned will remain in force because this is an international agreement. They will not, therefore, be affected by the delay. Moreover, as I said before, I hope that we will be able to vote on this proposal during the January part-session.
In any case, it is regrettable that they are asking us for an urgent procedure now, at the last minute, because we have had all of 2000 to process this proposal for a regulation.
I think that the institutions, in this case the Commission, should work more responsibly to ensure that proposals reach this House in due time so that a rapporteur can be appointed, the Commission proposal can be examined, amendments can be tabled, they can be debated in committee and they can then come to the plenary, which they have asked us to do in a single plenary sitting, which is impossible.
Madam President, on a point of order. I wish to inform the House of the news of the closure of a car factory in Luton in the United Kingdom, with the loss of many thousands of jobs. I am sure the House will be concerned to hear of this latest example of decline in industry in Europe.
The next item is the report (A5-0361/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 97/67/EC on opening to competition of Community postal services [COM(2000)0319 - C5-0375/2000 - 2000/0139(COD)].
Madam President, on a point of order. If we are to debate this important question today, it is essential to have the amendments that were tabled in the various languages for us to know what we are debating. They are not available. I tried last night and first thing this morning. It seems to me an impossible state of affairs when we are debating a very important subject and amendments have come in late, together with those that went to committee, and we do not have them in our mother tongue.
Mr Atkins, the services tell me that the delay was only for this week. They thought the translations could be made available in spite of this fairly difficult and densely packed timetable. Nonetheless, I have no doubt that this Chamber will have been able to examine each of the amendments in detail and I think it is possible to have the debate on this report. In any case, all the translations will be available to MEPs between now and the time of the vote.
Madam President, I want to talk about the same point of order as Mr Atkins. I do not think it is usual for the discussion preceding a vote to be a discussion of amendments. We discussed the latter in committee. What is more, I was able to obtain these amendments yesterday and I believe that we are called upon to have a general discussion today. We shall have ample opportunity tomorrow to vote on the additional amendments tabled at the last minute by all the groups. I think that this important matter, close to the committee' s heart, ought to be debated today.
Madam President, I believe we must discuss this matter today, because we are prepared for it and are waiting to discuss it, but I wish to refute Mr Savary's arguments regarding the amendments. It is actually scandalous that these are not available in time for our debate.
It is certainly important, to my mind, that we know which honourable Members have tabled which amendments. For that reason, conducting a debate without access to the amendments must remain an exceptional situation. It is an extremely unusual procedure, and what Sir Robert Atkins says is essentially correct. Unfortunately, however, we have now reached the point at which we can no longer defer this discussion. I therefore ask, Madam President, that we begin the debate, but let me put on record that this practice of conducting a debate in ignorance of the tabled amendments is a highly abnormal practice.
I share your point of view. Ideally, our Chamber ought to be able to have the debate after familiarising itself with all the documents and amendments. I nonetheless think that, as you have indicated, we can, in the present circumstances, enter into the debate in the normal way, and I therefore propose giving the floor to our rapporteur, Mr Ferber.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it was actually our intention to let you all send your Christmas post and to wait until all the Christmas mail was delivered, after which we should have had ample time in January to discuss postal services in general. However, a majority of the House decided that we should hold the debate today, so that is what we shall have to do.
When we discuss postal services, we have to speak about three things. What has surprised me slightly as rapporteur over the past few months is that we have somewhat lost sight of these three things. Firstly, we must ensure that postal services are provided at affordable prices; secondly, we must ensure that the services are of a high quality, and, thirdly, we must ensure that we are able to guarantee the availability of at least a minimum range of postal services in all parts of the European Union.
This is what the people of Europe rightly expect of us. To that end, we have received a proposal from the Commission in accordance with the directive which was adopted in 1997. It is a matter of examining how much monopoly is needed to achieve these aims - especially the universal availability of services - and how much competition is possible alongside such a monopoly. I have always taken the view, as far as postal services are concerned, that there should be as much competition as possible and as much monopoly as is necessary. This, I believe, is a maxim that should be taken to heart. I very much regret that the numerous studies on postal services conducted by the Commission in recent years do not give any clear indication as to how much monopoly is required for a guaranteed universal postal service. Such an indication would have made my work a little easier and would certainly have helped Parliament too. As things stand, everyone has been able to pick and choose from this wide range of studies as he or she has seen fit.
So what exactly is it all about? It is about the degree of monopoly we require. The Commission proposed that the monopoly service be restricted to letters weighing 50 grammes or less. At the committee stage, we agreed on a compromise, namely letters up to a weight of 150 grammes. The Commission proposed the full liberalisation of cross-border mail. We in the reporting committee agreed on a compromise, namely that the same weight ceiling should apply to cross-border mail and national mail. The Commission proposed that legal certainty be created in the realm of the so-called special services, which is understandable, given the problems that exist here, especially in the Directorate-General for Competition. We decided in committee to leave the question of special services as it is regulated in Directive 97/67/EC.
The Commission proposed a review of the directive in 2004. Our committee proposed that this be undertaken one year earlier. We also agreed that the period of validity of this directive should remain unchanged. Back in 1997, at the time of the decisive vote on the last directive, I told Martin Bangemann, who was the Commissioner responsible at that time, that the only good thing to be said about the old directive was that it had an expiry date, that it would eventually lapse. I believe it is right to continue this practice, because it exerts pressure on the markets, and that is absolutely essential if we are to achieve what the people expect of us. As citizens of our countries, we pay for this monopoly every day with overpriced postage stamps throughout the European Union. The quality of the postal services has not improved over the past 500 years!
We have to think about all of that. It is not the responsibility of postal administrations to create jobs throughout each country, but it is their responsibility to move mail from A to B. If we just concentrate on what the core business of postal administrations is and on the need to ensure that markets are opened up judiciously and gradually - not abruptly, but gradually; the Commission went for abrupt change in its proposal, but we in the committee agreed on a different approach - then it will certainly be possible to safeguard what needs to be safeguarded. I ask you to support the compromise we worked out in committee.
Madam President, the opinion of the committee of which I have the honour to be draftsman, which was approved by a very large majority, introduces limitations to the rapid liberalisation of the postal services, opting for a gradual and controlled opening to competition without market distortions which would be detrimental to the services' customers and users and to the national universal service companies. Thus, we propose that the opening should take into account Article 16 of the Treaty, which raises the provision of traditional postal services to the category of services of general interest, given the place they occupy in the shared values of the Union and their role in promoting social and territorial cohesion, for which reason they should operate on the basis of principles and conditions that enable them to fulfil their missions.
Naturally, we point out weaknesses in the draft directive, requiring that the economic and social impact of liberalisation be made known and an assessment be made of the economic effectiveness and service quality provided by the companies so that Parliament can decide with certainty and clarity.
Report (A5-0391/2000) by Mr Colom i Naval, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision concerning the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument (paragraph 24 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 on budgetary discipline and improvement of the budgetary procedure (SEC(2000)2167 - C5-0665/2000)
The draft general budget for 2001 amended by the Council
Haug (PSE), rapporteur. (DE) Madam President, in Tuesday's debate I expressed my thanks for the wholehearted cooperation I have received from the President of the Council, the Commissioner and the honourable Members of the House, and I spoke of the feeling of solidarity we all had with one other, which, I believe, has now brought this budget to a successful conclusion. At this point, since a large number of Members are present in the chamber, I should like to repeat that the only reason why I was able to perform my task as rapporteur so effectively was the work that was done with me and for me by the marvellous secretariat of the Committee on Budgets, which has worked extremely hard throughout the year, putting in many, many hours, including weekends. The members of the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets, whether they work front stage or behind the scenes, have been very, very cooperative and highly competent. I wish to convey my sincere thanks to them and I call on the House to show its appreciation with me.
I should like to announce a few fairly minor technical adjustments very briefly. We shall have modifications to Amendments Nos 171, 187 and 21 in Document 12. Since the legal bases now exist for the programmes we adopted with the Council, the money will be brought forward in these cases from the reserve to the budget lines in question.
I believe my honourable colleagues will all subscribe to these modifications. The programmes involved are the action programme for equal opportunities, the MEDIA programme and the action programme against discrimination.
The last announcement I have to make relates to Amendment No 197. This amendment concerns MEDA. We intend to keep the remarks we adopted at the first reading for the second reading as well. I think that is all I have to say for the time being. I am sure the House will endorse these decisions.
Madam President, I can be fairly brief, because I paid all my tributes at the first reading and no longer have so many problems with the other budgets. But I believe the Commission deserves a special word of thanks, particularly the Director-General, whom Mrs Haug did not mention. May I now rectify that oversight.
I have fallen victim to the new software program, which grieves me greatly, since I am an engineer by profession. But I do depend, of course, on the assistance of our services. With regard to Amendments Nos 34, 38, 35, 36 and 78, the computer has jumbled up the figures. I therefore ask that technical adjustments be made here. It is a matter of restoring what we said at the first reading. This is not a fiddle. It is the computer that has cooked the books here. The Members of Parliament have been the soul of propriety, as ever. I therefore ask for your support and trust on this point. We shall make hand-written amendments, using 19th-century methods to overrule and outmanoeuvre the technology of the 21st century. That will set everything to rights.
Report (A5-0380/2000) by Mrs Haug and Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2001 as modified by the Council (all sections) (13830/2000 - C5-0600/2000 - 1999/2190(BUD)) and on Letter of Amendment No 2/2001 to the 2001 draft general budget (13833/2000 - C5-0653/2000)
(Parliament adopted the resolution) President. I offer my heartfelt congratulations to the two rapporteurs, Mrs Haug, the general rapporteur, and Mr Ferber.
Madam President, I do not wish to hold up the ceremony. With all this gratitude having been expressed, I should just like to thank the members of the Sittings Service, who have worked hard to ensure that the votes were taken quickly and efficiently.
We shall now proceed to the signing of the budget. I should like to point out that this document is being signed, for the second time, by three women.
(Having invited Mrs Parly, President-in-Office of the Council, Mrs Schreyer, member of the Commission, Mr Wynn, Chairman of the Committee on Budgets, and the rapporteurs, Mrs Haug, Mr Ferber and Mr Colom i Naval to join her, the President signed the budget.)
We have now signed the budget for 2001. To put the record straight, I must state that Mrs Parly, who has had to leave, has informed me, on behalf of the Council, that she was delighted with the agreement between our two institutions, which was a result of the conciliation meeting on 23 November. She also recalled the Council's observation concerning the classification of budget headings for the Commission's pre-retirement plan and for administrative expenditure on fisheries agreements.
Ladies and gentlemen, please take your seats for what is practically a historic sitting, the last Friday sitting in Strasbourg.
Indeed, it is my very great pleasure to chair this, the last sitting in the millennium, as the next time we meet within these walls it will be both a new century and a new millennium.
Mr President, I should just like to make a slight correction to what you said: this is not our last Friday sitting in Strasbourg but our last Friday sitting in Strasbourg for the time being. We decide our calendar of sittings each year, and I hope that this costly and erroneous decision will be reversed and that we will once again use the full five days in Strasbourg and do away with the expensive mini-sessions instead.
I sense that we are going to have a whole new debate on the issue.
Mr President, I can confirm what Mr Posselt has just said. This is not the last Friday sitting in Strasbourg. I deeply regret that the French Government has not appealed to the Court of Justice against the European Parliament decision, but I have no doubt that this decision will be overturned sooner or later. I imagine it refrained from taking action purely because such action was not timely under the French Presidency.
The 1997 ruling, which re-established the annual timetable after an attempt by the European Parliament to withdraw one of the monthly sittings, was perfectly clear. The European Parliament has no sovereign right to determine its timetable. It must respect the Treaty, and the Protocol appended to the Treaty states quite clearly that the twelve monthly part-sessions are to be held in Strasbourg. The Advocate-General at the time clearly stipulated "the 12 periods of monthly plenary sessions". This phrase means that we must adhere to existing practice, which must not be changed.
To put it in terms that we can all agree on, let us say that this is the last Strasbourg part-session of the second millennium, and we shall see what happens in the third.
Mr President, in the Minutes I am recorded as having voted in favour of paragraphs 11 and 12 of the Theato report. I did not, I abstained. I should be grateful if that could be corrected.
Mr President, we had a group of visitors yesterday, and this group also attended the vote in the visitors' gallery. In the evening, we were unable to explain to them why this Parliament voted with only 170 Members in attendance. If, as a Parliament, we want to be taken seriously by the public, we will need to be present. Again, this morning, only a handful of people are attending. That is no reflection upon those present. Yesterday afternoon, too, only a handful of Members attended. I do not blame those present but rather those absent. At this rate, we will soon be unable to meet on a Thursday afternoon if so few people take part in the votes. I believe we need to do a bit of soul-searching here, and find out how we can ensure that at least a sufficient number attend when we meet on a Thursday afternoon.
I shall take your speech as an appeal for more assiduous attendance.
The next item is the report (A5-0319/2000) by Mrs Sbarbati, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the Commission communication 'Towards a Europe for all ages - promoting prosperity and intergenerational solidarity' .
Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, it was with great pleasure that I agreed to be the rapporteur of this major European Parliament resolution which deals with one of the greatest problems of our European Community: the ageing of the population.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 15 December 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen, on Saturday, as you know, an earthquake struck Central America once again, with tragic consequences. This is an area which has already been seriously affected on a number of occasions since the beginning of the twentieth century. The latest, provisional, figures for victims in El Salvador are already very high. There are 350 people dead, 1 200 people missing, the area is completely devastated and thousands of homes have been destroyed throughout the country.
The European Union has already shown its solidarity by sending a rescue team to the area, whilst financial assistance from the Union and Member States has been, or is in the process of being, released and I am able to inform you that some groups in the European Parliament have requested that this issue be included in the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance on Thursday. However, I should like to inform you that I have, of course, on behalf of the European Union, expressed our sincere condolences and deepest sympathy to the President of El Salvador in the tragedy which has struck his country. I would ask you, as a mark of respect for the victims and for the immense suffering of their families, to observe a minute' s silence.
President. Tragically, on 31 December, a day that most of us commemorate with celebration, became a day of mourning for the families of Volendam, in the Netherlands, who lost 10 of their young people on New Year' s Eve. I should like, on behalf of the European Parliament, to express our sympathy to the parents and families of the victims. I should also like to wish the 180 people injured in this awful fire a speedy recovery.
I should not forget that many places, where joyful celebrations are also held, are all too often transformed by sadness and mourning, due to a lack of adequate safety measures. It is in the same spirit that I should like to express my condolences to the families of the 309 victims of the fire at a disco in Luoyang, in China, and I would ask you to observe a minute' s silence in honour of these victims.
President. Ladies and gentlemen, I had wished, as everyone had, that we would be able to open our first part-session of the year without having to mention further victims of ETA terrorism. Unfortunately, on 20 December, Juan Miguel Gervilla, a police officer in Barcelona, was killed by terrorists. He had disturbed his killers as they were preparing an attack. His courageous actions unfortunately cost him his life but undoubtedly also saved many others. This is why I would like to pay tribute to him in particular and I would ask you again to observe a minute' s silence.
With regard to the report by Mr Cashman on public access to Parliament, Council and Commission documents, for which the vote on the draft legislative resolution was postponed on 16 November, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs has informed me that it is not yet able to meet the two month deadline laid down in the Rules of Procedure. This is why it has requested that it be referred back to committee pursuant to Rule 144(1) of the Rules of Procedure.
I shall now give the floor to Mr Watson, Chairman of this committee, so that he can present the request on its behalf.
Madam President, the House kindly agreed on 16 November to a request from the committee which I have the honour to chair to delay the final vote on Mr Cashman's proposed legislative resolution. That delay was intended to allow time for the other institutions to consider our amendments and for the Commission to formulate amended proposals. Since our November part-session, we have had contacts with the other institutions, though as yet no agreement has been forthcoming. Therefore, we would ask the House for a prorogation of the delay of a maximum of two months in order to conclude the dialogue and, we hope, present to you compromise amendments for voting at our part-session on 28 February.
The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Tuesday 11 January.
Sittings from 15 to 18 January in Strasbourg President. I have received no requests for amendments to the agenda for Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday.
Madam President, I would like to point out to my fellow Members and to yourself, that, whilst I understand the reasons which led you to go over the top and set such a full agenda for Wednesday, with regard to the political topics due to be discussed between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., the Council and the Commission have exactly the same speaking time as all the Members of the European Parliament, i.e. 90 minutes for the Council and the Commission and 90 minutes for the MEPs. I am sorry to have to point this out, as I know we have a very busy day on Wednesday, but let us try to change this, as, after all, parliamentary debate should take precedence over the institutions.
Thank you, Mr Dell' Alba. I will, of course, take note of your comment.
Madam President, I would like to take up some points made by Mr Dell'Alba and also say something about Wednesday' s sitting. Not only is Wednesday' s agenda completely overbooked, but important reports - such as the Sjstedt report on natural habitats, as well as others - are being handled without debate, which is wrong to my mind. This can be put down to the disastrous decision to cancel Friday sittings, which I would like to take this opportunity to highlight.
The next item is the report by Mrs van der Laan (A5-0397/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the progress report of the Commission on the measures taken in the light of the observations of the European Parliament in its 1997 discharge resolution [COM(2000) 224 - C5-0223/2000 - 2000/2113(DEC)].
Mr President, there have been further developments regarding the report on the 1997 discharge. That is a new departure, but then again it comes as no surprise, for this was a special case after all. It was the first discharge after the fall of the Santer Commission and thus the first opportunity for this Parliament to have a say in the European Commission' s reform policy. Since then, Parliament has made its views heard on a regular basis, notably in the excellent reports by Mr van Hulten and Mr Poms Ruiz. Needless to say, the reforms should help restore confidence in Europe. The question today is whether those initial steps, which were promised at the time in order to obtain the discharge, have actually been made.
All in all, it is fair to say that the Commission has made every effort to meet the requirements of this Parliament. A serious start has been made on reforms. It is, of course, too soon to determine whether all the required results have been achieved; too many words still need to be translated into action for that to happen. Although things can still go pear-shaped, even at Commissioner level - and naturally the abominable Commission proposal on access to documents is one of the things that springs to mind - it is quite clear that this Commission is highly committed to making a break with the past.
I will give you a few examples. In its discharge resolution, this Parliament demanded an end to an unacceptably high percentage of error in bills. The Commission subsequently submitted proposals to streamline the Financial Regulation, and produced a plan to eliminate all abnormal arrears by the end of 2003. Parliament is issued with six-monthly reports on this. In addition, Parliament asked for a reform of the rules on whistle-blowers and for disciplinary procedures; the Commission ensured that this reform was made. Parliament asked for improvements in the field of bureaux for external aid; tick. Parliament requested a list of current fraud and corruption inquiries; again tick. Parliament asked the Commission to clarify its foreign aid strategy; tick yet again. Mr President, these are but a few examples, but they do demonstrate that the European Parliament can yield substantial results if it makes a concerted effort.
One section of the discharge which this Parliament has every reason to be proud, is that concerning the hospital in Gaza. In 1996, this project, which is subsidised by the European Union, was 97% complete. Due to mismanagement and a lack of follow-up, this hospital still stood empty up until the end of last year, at the very time - we are familiar with the images from the Middle East - when there was a desperate shortage of medical help in an area which very much needs it.
In April 1999, this Parliament found out about this scandalous state of affairs. From that moment, we gave the Commission hell, with no let-up, until we finally had results. Since the hospital opened three months ago, more than 2 700 patients have already been treated and more than 370 healthy babies have been born there, which is good news in an area where death is an every-day occurrence. If this Parliament had not made it so clear that enough was enough, I am convinced that the hospital would still be empty now. Unfortunately, the hospital is now having to face other problems, namely it is impossible to make any deliveries to this hospital due to the closure of Gaza, and even ambulance services cannot get through the Israeli blockades, but that is another story.
I would like to take the opportunity to go into Mr van Dam' s amendment very briefly. I believe that, although it is an extremely kind and considerate amendment, the content of which must be given due follow-up, I cannot recommend approval of it as rapporteur, because we have very consistently rejected new elements in the discharge, so I hope that there will be some understanding for this.
Needless to say, there are also areas of concern with regard to the 1997 discharge. For example, a higher level of transparency must be achieved within the personnel policy with regard to recruitment of staff and the proposed redundancy scheme. I also expect the Commissioner to shed some light on how the Commission will guarantee that each individual Commissioner will ensure that recommendations from the Court of Auditors do not end up in some drawer somewhere, but will be implemented with due care. This Parliament will monitor the follow-up of all reports brought by the Commission. The extensive pledges for the coming years must be translated into action, and I hope that we can do this together, and in doing so, close off this sad chapter and be able to work together on the future with confidence.
Mr President, the van der Laan report gives a clear overview of the measures which the European Commission has taken further to observations made by Parliament in the context of the 1997 discharge. From that point of view, my group will support the report, and I would congratulate Mrs van der Laan on her achievement.
However, I would like to point out - and that is also mentioned in the report - that although some progress has been made in five areas, they have a long way to go yet. This applies to the closure of accounts, improving institutional management and control problems, the technical assistance offices and the fight against fraud and corruption. I will not go into all these areas but highlight a few.
I believe it is of utmost importance for the Commission, in its attempts to reduce the unacceptably high percentage of error, to identify the Member States which fail to achieve any improvement in the percentage of error in the case of the biggest expense items, for example. The Member States will obviously not like this, but why could we not keep a scoreboard for this, just as we do for the Member States' performance rating in terms of implementing European legislation? The more transparency, the better. An added benefit is that the national parliaments can bring their governments to book. In the fight against fraud and the careless handling of European monies, we must rely far more on cooperation with national parliaments. The trust of the citizen in the powers that be, and specifically in the European Union, is at stake. It cannot be that we here in Europe get the blame for the negligence and carelessness of national governments.
In the near future, the Commission will need to pull out all the stops in order to set up an efficient management and control system. We will soon be discussing the new Financial Regulation which, I hope, will better accommodate the requirements of modern management. Continuity, transparency and clear competences are vital parameters in this. We must avoid a situation where different bodies responsible for fighting fraud and corruption, such as OLAF and the financial irregularities panel, cancel each other out in their efforts. There is nothing worse than having investigation offices putting all their energy into mutual competence-based squabbles.
Finally, we set great store by the Court of Auditors systematically examining the annual reports to see how the Commission has acted upon critical remarks made previously. Control without referring back to errors detected previously is a job half-done.
Mr President, I wish to thank Mrs van der Laan for giving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the European Parliament a model on which to base future discharge reports.
From the outset she was very clear that she wanted to concentrate on a few areas where we wanted to see real improvement. They were clearly set out last year. Now we have a follow-up to check that those points have been implemented. We shall be following her lead in not supporting the amendments tabled because we want to keep to that clear-cut approach.
On the whole, the Commission has responded positively, and this now has to be set within the context of the more general Commission reform. We are pleased that the Commission will present annual activity reports for each Directorate-General but, for that to work effectively, we need to know the targets for these DGs very soon. Work on staff policy has also gone ahead but things seem to be moving very slowly. We appreciate the sensitivity of negotiations on staff issues but we and the European public will soon lose patience if the talking does not stop soon and the action start.
The CAP and Structural Funds are the areas where most mismanagement problems lie in the EU, partly due to the scale of the finance received by these areas. That is why it is critical that we, as the controlling and accountable body, have access to information on the financial management of these two areas. We look forward to receiving regular reports from the Personal Representatives Group.
External aid, however, is an area where we still see substantial problems. The rapporteur has referred clearly to the disastrous way the aid to Palestine was handled, which gives a very poor signal at a time when the utmost political delicacy and sensitivity were needed in that region.
Another Court of Auditors' report on external aid has come out very recently and we shall be looking at that in the future. Once again, I thank the rapporteur and congratulate her on a job well done.
Mr President, in her report, rapporteur Mrs van der Laan looks at the progress which the Commission has made over the past year with regard to following recommendations set out in the report on the 1997 discharge. She is rather pleased with the reams of paper which the Commission has produced. I am waiting for more substance, for results. The intentions are good, but the effect will not be evident until we see the results, once, for example, OLAF is working truly independently, once the backlog in payments has been cleared, once fewer errors are made in payments and once we finally gain access to confidential documents.
Use of depleted uranium in Bosnia and Kosovo (Balkan syndrome)
The next item is the Council and Commission declarations on the use of depleted uranium in Bosnia and Kosovo.
I shall give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Danielsson straightaway.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Members of the Commission, the information concerning health risks posed by depleted uranium to the population and to staff in peace-making missions in the Balkans, as well as its possible environmental consequences, has caused great concern in Europe. It is a concern which must be taken with the greatest seriousness. The issue ought to be investigated by organisations and institutions with competence within this area.
In November of last year, representatives of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) visited Kosovo. UNEP has been working for some time on a report on the toxicological and radiological consequences of the use of depleted uranium in the Balkans. We welcome this report, together with the report which the World Health Organisation (WHO) is at present in the process of compiling on the same subject.
The issue of possible health risks to those soldiers who take part in peace-making efforts in the Balkans is mainly a responsibility for NATO and participating States. The EU countries which take part in these missions do so on the basis of national decisions. In the interests of the greatest possible transparency on the issue, views are, however, being exchanged within relevant consultative bodies. A discussion is to take place over lunch during the meeting with the General Affairs Council on 22 January.
This also reminds us of how important it is that the effects upon health and the environment of military crisis management initiatives should be discussed now that the EU is developing its crisis management capacity. This is a natural part of a crisis management organisation' s activities, and work of this kind is being done both within NATO and the WEU, as well as within the UN.
The issue of the possible health risks and environmental consequences involved in the use of depleted uranium also draws attention to a very important issue: that of the general environmental problems in the Balkans. The populations of Kosovo, Yugoslavia and other war-torn countries in the Balkans have been sorely tried, with tragic and long-term consequences. It is in the interests of Europe as a whole to overcome these consequences in cooperation with the governments in the region, which are all democratic and peace-oriented. Through the Commission' s aid programme, the EU is offering support to the countries of the region in their efforts to get to grips with their environmental problems.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am deeply grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to speak on a matter which I believe, as I am sure you will agree, rightly deserves to be dealt with as a matter of top priority by Parliament. It is only right that we should be concerned for the health of our military personnel, of the citizens of the Balkans and of those working for Community institutions, non-governmental institutions, international organisations and Member State organisations operating in the area. I therefore share the anxiety expressed regarding the health of all these people.
I should like to begin by expressing my solidarity with all those who are experiencing health problems, who are concerned about their families and who are suffering from illness. The fact is that there are many such individuals and they are entitled to receive the best care available. They have the right to be informed of the cause of their condition without delay, and we shall devote all our energy to doing so. We are all under an obligation to do what is needed to ensure that the relevant information is available to those concerned.
I stand before you today as Secretary-General of the Council, but I am also here in my capacity as the High Representative for the Union' s Foreign and Security Policy. In dealing with the matters which have given rise to concern in the House, I shall endeavour to do so from the Council' s point of view.
I should first like to reiterate my personal commitment and the commitment of all Members of Council to this region, namely the Balkans. I am sure they will make every effort to help clarify the situation.
Our states are democracies, they have nothing to hide, and it is our intention to forward Parliament all the information available at any given time.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the crucial issue we are confronted with is to establish clearly whether there is a link between the use of these weapons and the illnesses notified by the troops or by those who served in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans, or whether, on the contrary, the incidence of these illnesses is no different from that usually recorded amongst our troops.
If we are to provide a clear answer to it, we must proceed in as rational a manner as possible. We should investigate: if this really were a syndrome in the etymological sense of the word, then all those affected would show similar symptoms. In time, those symptoms would develop in a similar way, and the outcome would also be similar. That is what is generally understood by the word syndrome. So these are the indications we must seek and we should deal with them in a fully open and transparent manner.
All of us involved in establishing the truth must base our conclusions on facts and not on mere assumptions. Furthermore, if we are to assess the facts, we must have access to all the information available. We must make a particular point of fostering openness and transparency amongst ourselves. Once we are aware of the facts, we should study them in such a way that all the results we make public generate calm and inspire confidence. Our work is indeed inspired by this spirit.
Such openness and transparency must be common to all: they must permeate all the Member States of the European Union, relationships between the Member States of the Union and NATO, and those between NATO and other allies involved in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans. Obviously they must also characterise relationships between governments in the region.
Accordingly, the European Union' s Political and Security Committee dealt with this matter on 9 January. Member States shared their concerns and information on the measures each had taken, as the current presidency stated. There was broad agreement that NATO, as the institution that had assumed responsibility for handling the Balkan crisis, should be charged with assembling information from all those involved regarding the use of depleted uranium, the location of military contingents, and all medical data.
As you are aware, ladies and gentlemen, at that meeting the Commission also explained the measures it intended to take. I am sure that the Commission will today be able to supply information on the measures it has taken, either through Commissioner Wallstrm or through her representative.
As regards NATO, I have to tell you that as soon as the matter became public, I personally contacted the Secretary-General. We have remained in constant contact ever since. The Secretary-General, his assistants and the Council' s assistants have ensured that we have all kept each other as well-informed and up to date with developments as possible.
Allow me to recall briefly the measures taken by NATO at its meeting on 10 January: first, it convened a meeting of national military medical experts to allow them to make contact with each other and exchange the whole gamut of ideas, background information, objectives, etc. A working group was set up immediately to serve as a forum for exchanging information. I think it is important to highlight that membership of this group was open to all countries who had played some part in peace-keeping operations in the Balkans, not just to NATO members.
It was also agreed to consult more closely with the countries in the region. Hence the matter was raised with the Yugoslav Foreign Minister, Mr Goran Svilanovic, on 10 January. He was assured that all of us, especially NATO, would forward all available information.
In addition, it was agreed to make all information concerning this incident available to the United Nations Environment Programme. Furthermore, as you are aware, NATO members reiterated their view that at that time there was no evidence to suggest that the use of the weapons in question constituted a significant risk for the armed forces of the countries involved, or for the civilian population of the Balkans.
NATO has also made it quite clear that it is by nature a military organisation, not a medical one. It is therefore required to submit all the necessary information to the European Union. It fully intends to do so, to enable better qualified organisations, notably the World Health Organisation, the United Nations Environment Programme and the International Atomic Energy Agency to draw the appropriate conclusions.
As you know ladies and gentlemen, NATO' s Medical Committee held its first meeting on Monday 15 January, and the newly established group for the exchange of information met for the first time yesterday. You are aware of the outcome of that initial discussion, it has been published and placed on the NATO web site, together with the scientific data exchanged at yesterday' s meeting.
I think it is worth emphasising once again that, at NATO' s suggestion, membership of the group dealing with the exchange of information will be open to all fifteen Member States of the European Union, and that maximum transparency is fully guaranteed. As the presidency has correctly stated, the next step will be to review the body of scientific material as it becomes available. Together with Mr Persson, Prime Minister and President of Council, Union Foreign Ministers will also deal with the matter at the first meeting of the General Affairs Council on 22 January.
I am convinced that this is a sensible way of proceeding at the moment, to ensure that we assemble all the information required and arrive at conclusions soundly based on facts.
Mr President, I must apologise, because this is not a comment on yesterday 's Minutes, but on the Minutes from the day before yesterday. Unfortunately, I noticed too late that my name was not on the attendance register. However, I was here the entire day and took part in all the roll-call votes and other votes. I would be grateful if this could therefore be corrected.
Mr Posselt, of course the Minutes will be corrected to reflect the true situation.
Mr President, Mrs Maes is not present in the Chamber. She is attending a Bureau meeting of our group. But I noticed that she is not listed on yesterday' s attendance register. She was quite definitely there. She spoke in the debate on the Swedish Presidency. I would ask you to amend the attendance register accordingly.
Mr President, on Monday afternoon, Parliament proposed that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs should look into the situation of the workers of the European corporation, Danone, threatened with the loss of 3000 jobs in the biscuit sector, 1700 of which are in France. We do not know when the committee is going to meet to discuss this matter and it is very urgent as the European Board of Danone is going to meet tomorrow.
Today, the workers of this company, in France at least, are on strike. I would like to hear your reply on the subject of this inquiry and, in the meantime, on behalf of myself and my fellow party members, I would like to express solidarity with these workers. It is appalling that a corporation worth millions should be able to drive thousands of workers throughout Europe into unemployment and poverty.
Mrs Laguiller, I would suggest that, given the importance and the nature of the matter, you speak to the chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, Mr Rocard.
Mr President, I wonder if you have seen the exclusive report in today's edition of Le Figaro. It contains an interview with a Corsican terrorist under the headline 'Armata corsa: menace terroriste sur Paris et Strasbourg.' The terrorist belongs to the Armata Corsa organisation. The interview appears on the front page of today's Le Figaro and says that the Armata Corsa is threatening direct strikes on Paris and Strasbourg if its demands, which include the release of prisoners, are not met. The newspaper says that it has published the article in order to alert French public opinion to the immediate danger threatening it and it also states, by way of information, that emergency measures have been taken in Paris in order to deal with this immediate threat. It says nothing about Strasbourg. I should like to draw the bureau's attention to this major issue and ask if it knows anything about this and if it has made representations to the authorities in Strasbourg for additional measures to be taken to protect Parliament because it seems to me that anyone who so wishes can enter the Parliament building and I fear that we may have to deal with highly dangerous and unforeseen circumstances.
Mr Marinos, I wish to say, first of all, that I am grateful for your information, or at least for the fact that you have shared it with us. There is a feeling in Parliament, which I think is shared by all Members, that the authorities governing this institution take account of and give great priority to the issue of security. I therefore feel that everything necessary is either being done or being considered in order to guarantee the smooth functioning of this Chamber in Strasbourg or in Brussels in the most secure conditions possible. In any event, thank you for your information.
Mr President, as rapporteur in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on preparations for the accession of the Czech Republic, I have a request to make of you. It has come to our attention that a member of the Czech Parliament, Mr Ivan Pilip, has been arrested in Cuba. He has evidently been accused of spying. The truth is that he met civil rights campaigners and that his actions were quite normal for a member of a freely elected parliament.
Mr President, I urge you to arrange for a request to be made to the Cuban authorities for Mr Pilip and those accompanying him to be released immediately, because the Cuban regime does not have any moral grounds for giving lessons in democracy to members of a freely elected parliament. I have all the more reason for asking you this given that in April this year a meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union is due to take place in Cuba. How can one possibly justify holding a meeting of this kind in a country where members of parliament are arrested if they talk to civil rights campaigners?
Thank you very much, Mr Schrder, I shall convey your information and your concern - which, I think we all share - to Mrs Fontaine, the President of this Parliament, who will certainly state Parliament' s position on this issue.
Mr President, I rise to request that the threats of terrorism against this House be taken seriously and that the Secretary-General draw up a plan to actually guarantee the safety of this House.
I shall repeat what I said a few moments ago: I believe that Parliament takes security issues extremely seriously, and we all feel that the circumstances in which we work and the fame of Parliament itself make it a target. The competent authorities are therefore very attentive to this issue and to looking at measures to improve the situation so that we can work safely and in peace.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 18 January 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, on 26 January, ETA claimed another victim in a bomb attack in San Sebastian, which cost the life of Ramon Dez Garca, an army cook, and injured two other people. I should like to offer the European Parliament' s sincere condolences to the family of the victim and to send our wishes for the prompt recovery of those injured in this attack.
Unfortunately, all we can do is to reaffirm our feeling of revulsion and absolute condemnation of this indiscriminate violence.
At the same time, let me welcome to the visitors' gallery Mr Luis de Grandes and Mr Jess Caldera, respectively the heads of the Popular Party and the Spanish Socialist Workers Party delegations of the Spanish parliament. They have come to present to the European institutions the agreement for freedom and against terrorism signed by their political parties on 8 December 2000, to which many trade unions, employers' associations and Basque peace associations, among others, were signatories.
Your stance is all the more courageous, gentlemen, since ETA recently declared that all the present and future signatories to this agreement will be targeted by their actions. Please be assured that you can count on the European Parliament' s solidarity.
Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to observe a minute' s silence.
The President of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities issued an order on 26 January in which he set aside the decision of the European Parliament of 23 October 2000 recognising the French Government' s notification announcing the ending of Jean-Marie Le Pen's mandate.
The order states that Mr Le Pen should rejoin Parliament and, of course, it is my responsibility to apply this court decision immediately.
Furthermore, I have asked the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for an opinion on what action the European Parliament should take in respect of this matter. I have already noticed one new element: the President of the Court of First Instance has conferred upon the European Parliament discretionary powers in relation to a decree ending the mandate of the European Parliament. If this decision were to be confirmed, the Le Pen case would be a further step to establishing the powers of the European institutions over national governments
Madam President, when, at your instigation, I left the Chamber of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, I paraphrased General MacArthur' s famous saying, when forced out of the Philippines by the enemy, "I will come back" .
Like him, having returned, I can today say, "I am back!"
The Court of Justice has indeed reinstated me as a legitimate Member of the European Parliament, acknowledging the sound basis of my defence. Indeed, the House must be aware that, on the pretext of a trivial incident occurring during the election campaign, the Socialist-Communist Government elected several days later has, for three years, flouting all legal principles, conducted a veritable witch hunt against me with a view to ridding themselves of a political adversary in Parliament, even though I had the mandate of millions of voters. It is, I believe, this fumus persecutionis, in combination with the violations of the law and of parliamentary immunity, primarily, which led the Court to make its ruling. I am certain that all democrats will rejoice at this principled and just decision.
I wrote to you yesterday, Madam President, because the largest democratic country in the world, India, is going through a particularly tragic experience, and I think it would be appropriate for Parliament to show its intention of standing by the Indian authorities and people at this time, and I would ask you, with your approval, to observe a minute' s silence.
I did of course send a message to this effect to the Indian authorities immediately. Thank you for your suggestion, which, I believe, is the same as the suggestion Mrs Gill wished to make. I will readily invite you to observe a minute' s silence in honour of the victims of this horrendous disaster.
Madam President, thank you very much for that message of condolence, which is what I wanted to talk about concerning India.
Mr President, I did not rise to speak yesterday at the beginning of the sitting, but I do wish to clarify an issue concerning something said by the President of this Parliament. With regard to the tabling of the so-called Antiterrorist Agreement in Spain, the presidency of this Parliament stated that this was signed by various associations and unions, and the Church was mentioned. I wish to state, for the information of everyone here, that this is not the case, despite the pressure exerted by the Government and the Socialist Party. This statement has not even been signed by organisations that support the government in Madrid and, with all due respect, I must say that this situation, which is discussed here with such frequency, the situation of the Basque country, is complex and it requires efforts to maintain dialogue. This is what was requested, for example, in the manifesto that I submitted to President Fontaine, signed by four thousand intellectuals and others involved in culture in Catalonia.
Lastly, I wish to say that the situation is so complex and is so finely shaded that even Mrs Fontaine' s own party is standing in municipal elections in France, in Bayonne, in Biarritz and in Anglet, in coalition with Basque nationalist parties, including Mr Gorostiaga' s party, which is no favourite of mine, but which I imagine is not a favourite of Mrs Fontaine' s either.
Mr President, last Saturday Marie-Jos the last Queen of Italy and daughter of King Albert of this country died. She was a recognised democrat and historian. Sadly she did not live to see her exiled son and grandson allowed to return to their homeland. Thus her funeral shamefully could not take place in Italy as they would not be permitted to attend.
This Italian constitutional article has no place in modern Europe and is in clear breach of the freedom of movement provided for under the European treaties. I have three times attempted to gain the support of this Parliament in condemning this law. The issue is being decided at present by the Court of Human Rights and will not go away. I call upon the Italian government to use the opportunity afforded by the sad death of Queen Marie-Jos to fulfil its legal obligations to the European Union and grant the two male princes the same rights as every other Italian citizen and let them go home.
Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries. (ES) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I wish to express our rejection of this emergency procedure, which the Council requested of Parliament on 18 January and which asks us to deliver our opinion before 14 February. Our committee has given a commitment to process this legislative proposal as rapidly and as diligently as possible, whilst adhering to the legislative procedures that have been laid down, according to which the vote will take place on 13 February in the Strasbourg part-session, as has already been scheduled on the agenda.
I wish to take this opportunity, Mr President - because lately these last minute rushes have become a regular occurrence - to say that the Commission and the Council are given considerable notice, a whole year' s notice, of Parliament' s timetable, which should give them - and us too - sufficient time to work on processing these proposals.
We were consulted too late, on 7 December to be precise, but even so, we appointed Mr Nicholson as rapporteur and he presented his draft report immediately, the following day, which was 8 December. As I say, we plan to vote in committee on Monday 5 February and debate the report in Parliament' s sitting of Monday 12 in Strasbourg, in order that the vote can be held on 13 February and thereby meet the deadlines that we have been set. I simply wish to point out that we have shown nothing but good will and have shown ourselves to be completely willing, but we do not want to be asked the impossible and, even less, to do our work badly.
Progress of EU and Member State measures to combat BSE
The next item is the Commission statement on the progress of anti-BSE measures taken by the EU and Member States.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to update Parliament on the most recent events in relation to BSE. Many of you were present when I spoke to the Agriculture Committee last week. Nonetheless, let me very briefly summarise the main events of recent weeks.
Important new measures came into effect on 1 January. These included the ban on meat and bone meal and the testing of all animals over 30 months destined for the food chain. The Commission wrote to Ministers for Agriculture on 4 January and asked for replies to an extensive questionnaire on the implementation of BSE-related measures. A working document summarising the responses was circulated to the Agriculture Council on Monday last. The opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee on a number of BSE-related questions from the Commission was published on 17 January.
This set the agenda for the Agriculture Council on Monday. Following the usual, very lengthy discussions, Member States agreed on the following main orientations. A ban on mechanically recovered meat. The heat treatment of ruminant fats for inclusion in animal feed and the removal of the vertebral column, the backbone, from cattle. All three of these orientations follow directly from the previous discussions in the Council on the measures necessary to restore consumer confidence. They are also based on the opinion of the Scientific Committee.
I intend to present proposals within the next several days on all these issues to the Standing Veterinary Committee. They will, of course, result in further controls and potentially very significant costs. However Member States are prepared to accept virtually any measure to ensure that beef is now safe.
It is surely a matter of very great regret that this determination to tackle BSE has taken so long to emerge. Only seven months ago, the Commission failed to obtain a qualified majority to ban brain and spinal cord from food for human consumption and from animal feed. Equally, not all Member States implemented a ban on the feeding of meat and bone meal to ruminants in a satisfactory manner.
I would like now to turn to the proposals which the Commission will put to the Standing Veterinary Committee. Firstly, the one relating to mechanically recovered meat. The Commission will shortly consider a proposal to ban the use of mechanically recovered meat from all bones of ruminants of all ages. There is a case that material from bones other than the skull and vertebral column or from bones of young animals is safe. However, this involves important control problems and in the circumstances it is believed a total ban is necessary.
I might add that the use of mechanically recovered meat is increasingly repugnant to consumers. The processed meat industry has also called for this ban. The proposed measure should therefore be very welcome to both industry and consumers. On the question of rendered fat, the Commission will propose that ruminant fats to be included in ruminant feed should be pressure cooked in addition to the current requirement that they be ultrafiltrated. The Commission will equally act on the opinion that such ruminant fats should only be sourced from discrete adipose tissues when fed as milk replacers to calves.
We also need to reflect however if these changes can be properly enforced. For example, might there be control problems in distinguishing between different fats. If so, is there a need for a need for an outright ban on the use of ruminant fats in ruminant feed? If so, how do we ensure that the replacement fats are safe?
One final point on the issue of ruminant fats: it is surely incredible to the public that there should be higher standards relating to the use of ruminant fats in animal feed than applies to their use in food for human consumption. However that is the current situation and I intend to put this right.
On the vertebral column, the Commission intention is to require the removal of the vertebral column where there are doubts over the effectiveness of the ban on meat and bone meal or whenever it cannot be demonstrated that animals are highly unlikely to be incubating BSE. This is in keeping with the opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 1 February 2001.
The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 8 February, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
I have received no requests for amendments to the agenda for Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday; however, Mr McMillan-Scott has asked to be allowed to speak.
Madam President, I refer to the draft regulation on European political parties. At the last part-session in Strasbourg the Commission was going to give us a statement on that matter. Subsequently, it was withdrawn and I understand that the Commission has now come to a view on the funding of European political parties. This is a matter of some sensitivity, especially since there are certain parties represented in this House that might regard themselves, for some reason, as ineligible for such funding, even if they approved of the funding in the first place. Could you ask the Commission if it would make a statement on this matter at some stage before the House?
Secondly, Madam President, while we are on Tuesday's agenda, it is worrying to me that the European Parliament is holding a debate on the Commission's work programme for 2001 but does not have a resolution on that matter. This is especially important since there are some 200 measures contained in the Commission's work programme for 2001 which Parliament will debate, but on which it will have no resolution. This is a bad precedent. There should be a resolution, especially since we are supposed to be scrutinising the work of the Commission.
Finally, could I make the observation that far from being the Commission's work programme for 2001, we might rename it the work programme of the Commission, Parliament and Council.
Mr McMillan-Scott, the reason that there is no resolution tabled is because the Conference of Presidents believed that there are no grounds for one.
Madam President, I may be mistaken but I understood that the intention was indeed to have a resolution. But first we should refer the work programme to the relevant parliamentary committees to assess it, and should then bring forward a considered resolution with the committees responsible for the various areas adding their views. That is my understanding: there will be a resolution, but not immediately.
Madam President, this is not just a matter of Mr Cox understanding what was agreed. In line with the fact that there is a political programme for legislature, which began belatedly last year, the Commission has presented a programme for this year and the measures appear in the annex, which do not number 200 but 485, according to my group's counting; 205 are legislative and the others are not, and of those there is a substantial number which is carried over, since they were not implemented last year. Therefore, it is not sensible for us to table a resolution in which all these extremes are included; the procedure which we have agreed is that the relevant committees will examine the resolution in detail and, all things being equal, in April we could vote on this in full knowledge of the facts.
In relation to extending this programme to the Council, that may be an interesting suggestion for the future; but the interested parties at the moment are the Commission and Parliament.
Thank you, Mr Barn Crespo. That, then, is the way we shall proceed.
Mr McMillan-Scott, as regards your second question, the Commission is not due to make a statement on political party funding during this part-session. If you would like to include this item on the agenda, we could ask the Commission to make a statement on Thursday evening, for example, if you agree.
Madam President, thank you for that very helpful suggestion. Not many of us will be here on Thursday evening, unfortunately. It might be helpful if the Commission could take this on board and tomorrow morning, in the statement it makes on the Commission's work programme for 2001 - or the Commission and Parliament's work programme, as I like to call it - make such a statement in public.
President. I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to withdraw from the agenda the oral question to the Commission, tabled on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, regarding the Stability Plans in Ireland and France.
Madam President, we are presenting this request for two reasons: one parliamentary and one political.
The parliamentary reason relates to the work of the committees in this Parliament. At the moment, the examination of all the stability and coordination plans and the substantial improvement of the broad guidelines for economic policy is being studied by this Parliament's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which intends, if I am not mistaken, to present its report to Parliament in April. This issue therefore interferes with the activity of this Parliament.
Secondly, there is a political reason. The question tabled by the PPE was included in the Conference of Presidents dealing with Ireland. It emerged at the Conference of Presidents including France. If we add, in the crossfire of relations, parties which run governments, parties which are in opposition, and if we add all the desires of this House, on Thursday we are going to hold a debate, at a rather unfortunate time, on the 15 Member States. Please have no doubt about that.
Therefore, we believe that the best thing would be for Parliament to obey its rules and to work in accordance with the method which it has conferred upon itself.
Madam President, I would like to take advantage of the Commission President' s attendance to ask him about a serious matter. Every year, the European Movement in France organises a very important event, "Europe Day" , on 9 May. This year we wish to organise a day dedicated to the euro. Since last September, this movement has been asking you to fund this day. It is not possible to organise the day without your support. Yet, to date, we have received no assurance that the Commission' s contribution will be paid. If we have no such assurance by the end of the week, the European Movement in France will have to abandon the idea of organising this year' s "Europe Day" . I believe this would be extremely harmful to the common cause to which we dedicate all our strength.
Mr Prodi, do you wish to give Mrs Bers such assurance now or later in the course of your speech?
Mrs Bers, I am not familiar with the details of the question you have raised, but I will investigate the matter immediately and give you a response today.
The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs has decided to apply the procedure without report to that proposal. I shall give the floor immediately to Mr Watson, who is Chairman of that committee, to give us its opinion.
Watson (ELDR), Chairman of the Committee on Citizen's Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs. Madam President, the committee which I have the honour to chair is very much aware of the importance of this matter and the urgency of its adoption before 25 March 2001, to allow the Nordic Union to be fully involved. We would have preferred to have been informed of this earlier by the Council. They have brought it to us at the very last moment.
Nonetheless, in the circumstances it is our view that we would not wish to delay the vote on this, and we consider it best to treat this as a matter without report; we would therefore suggest that it be put straight to the vote in this part-session.
There being no Member who wishes to speak against this urgent procedure, we shall put the matter to the vote.
The next item is the joint debate on the presentation of the Commission's programme for 2001 and the oral question to the Commission tabled by Mr van Velzen and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, on the follow-up to the Nice European Council (B5-0006/2001).
I now give the floor to Mr Prodi, President of the Commission.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is only right that we should hold a general debate on the state of the Union once a year. I would like today's debate to be another step forward along the road we are to travel in 2001. It is a road which will clearly be marked by a number of events and priorities, which I shall mention shortly, but, most importantly, it will be taking us already - and I am tempted to say at last - in the direction of the Europe of tomorrow.
The Commission of which I have the honour of being President has always asked to be judged by what it does. That is why it is extremely important for me that cooperation between the Commission and Parliament, and the Commission's fruitful relationship with the Member States in the Council, lead to substantial, practical results. This is why I hope that this annual debate will become a valuable forum for free, open, common debate in which we can discuss our successes and problems in a constructive atmosphere, with a view to accomplishing the projects which are of real concern to the citizens of Europe.
I know that, on these occasions, the tradition is for the Commission President to present a detailed review of the policies implemented, but I am sure that nobody will object if I depart somewhat from that tradition and confine today's discussion to our main priorities for 2001 and to the longer-term question of Europe's future.
I will not dwell on the last 12 months. When I stood before this House, a year ago, I announced the four strategic objectives that my Commission had set itself: one, to promote new forms of governance on a European scale; two, to stabilise Europe and consolidate our influence in the world; three, to set new economic and social priorities; and four, to improve the quality of life for all.
With a view to improving the quality of life of the European citizens, we published our White Paper on Food Safety and a proposal for a regulation laying down requirements and basic principles in the area of food safety. We also proposed to set up a European Food Agency, which will come into operation next year.
In addition to this, we proposed to set up a European Air Safety Authority and prepared new, tough legislation on maritime safety following the Erika disaster.
To promote a new social and economic agenda for Europe, we put forward detailed, ambitious proposals to the Lisbon European Council. As a result, the EU now has an integrated strategy that will allow it to become the most dynamic, competitive knowledge-based economy in the world.
The key to stabilising our continent is our strategy for enlarging the European Union. Throughout 2000, the Commission resolutely pursued accession negotiations with the candidate countries, and we also launched the public debate on a genuine migration policy.
Finally, to promote new forms of European governance, we set to work on a White Paper which is scheduled to be published before the end of the summer.
Mr President, I refer to the comments made in this Chamber on Monday afternoon with respect to the anti-nuclear demonstration at the Faslane nuclear submarine base in Scotland.
As you are aware, I took part in that demonstration, and I would like to thank all those Members who expressed support for the action that I took when I participated in the largest-ever blockade of the base and was arrested, ironically enough, for committing a breach of the peace.
I just want to say a word to those Members who implied that my actions were somehow irresponsible or inappropriate. Firstly, nuclear weapons are not only immoral and inhumane, they are also illegal. The International Court of Justice in The Hague ruled that the possession of nuclear weapons is contrary to international law, and this was reaffirmed by a Scottish court in 1999. My action on Monday was therefore upholding the law, not breaking it.
Secondly, I believe nuclear weapons pose such a threat to all of us that it is legitimate and indeed essential to use all peaceful avenues open to us to try to rid our countries of them. Of course there are parliamentary channels to use to do that, and I use them, but I also believe it is legitimate and essential to use extra-parliamentary channels as well. It is our responsibility to use them. A democratic state is not just a gift and right, it is a responsibility. If citizens do not responsibly demonstrate against the operation of inhumane acts by their governments, the governments become increasingly irresponsive and corrupt.
Finally, it is the right and duty of every citizen, elected or not, to use all peaceful avenues to try to uphold international law. My action on Monday was one further small step in trying to achieve that.
Mr President, in welcoming my brave and gallant colleague, Mrs Lucas, back to the House, I would like to draw to my colleagues' attention that today we will also be visited by the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland; who will be received by the President this evening.
In that connection I would like to repeat Mrs Lucas' point that it was implied in this House on Monday that only irresponsible hotheads took part in the protest at Faslane. I ask Members to note that the leader of the Scottish national church, whom we will welcome here tonight, also took a leading part in that protest. Leading an ecumenical service, he drew attention to the Church's principled rejection of states' reliance on weapons of mass destruction. Profound opposition to nuclear weapons on both legal and moral grounds is a common position among responsible leaders of opinion, both religious and non-religious, throughout Scotland and throughout this great Union.
Mr President, to pick up on the points that Mrs Lucas has raised, I support the sentiments which she has outlined. However, I would ask if she could prevail upon her colleagues to desist from claiming some sort of parliamentary immunity every time she gets arrested at Faslane. Long before Mrs Lucas became involved, I had been involved in Faslane for many years and have been arrested there. I have never once called for parliamentary immunity. I had my day in court and I had my trial. I will not go down the road to parliamentary immunity because I want my day in court and I want to make my point and not hide behind some smokescreen.
Mr President, can I just establish for yesterday's Minutes a correction to my vote. I intended to vote yes on the Rbig Report.
Mr President, my point also relates to the Minutes. I wonder if it might be recorded on page 11 in the English version of the Minutes, at Item 8 where we talk about voting time, that the votes commenced at 12.12 p.m. They were advertised on the screen as commencing at 12.15 p.m. and for that reason some of us missed some of the early votes.
Mr President, regretfully we have learnt that exactly one month after an earthquake devastated El Salvador a similar tremor struck this Central American country again yesterday. I am sure that our Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico will set all the machinery in motion to urge the Community authorities, starting with the Commission, to renew their efforts of solidarity with this country.
We will look into this matter. If you are right, the Minutes will, of course, be corrected, as you say.
Mr President, very briefly, as a member of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico, I should also like to express our concern that the people of El Salvador have once more been afflicted by a natural disaster, and to urge that aid should arrive as soon as possible so that what happened after Mitch does not happen again, because if aid takes a long time to arrive it is the population that suffers.
Thank you, Mr Carnero Gonzlez. I believe that the House would join you in hoping this.
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0052/2001) by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission communication to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Making a reality of the 'European Research Area' : Guidelines for European Union research activities (2002-2006) [COM(2000) 612 - C5-0738/2000 - 2000(COS)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, never before have I spoken for so long in Parliament. You may go for a nap in between because eight minutes really is rather long.
Commissioner, it is now almost a year since it was agreed during the European Council in Lisbon that the European Union wants to become the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world and this Parliament rallied around that goal with a large majority. If the European Union wants to achieve this goal, then more investment in research, technological development, innovation and education is essential, both in the Member States as well as at European level. The creation of a European Research Area is vital to this. European research has proved a success: and the innovative efforts of Europe's businesses are also impressive, accounting in the first half of the 1990s for 33% of turnover. The European Framework Programmes of research and technological development have definitely contributed to this as well. The success of the Framework Programmes must therefore be retained in the future and that will also have to be demonstrated when the proposals for the sixth Framework Programme are discussed. But at the moment, ladies and gentlemen, there is absolutely no question of having one European research policy. The proposals made by Commissioner Busquin in order to actually bring such a policy about were well received by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, but on a number of points we still have a few gaps to fill and some concerns to raise.
One way of creating an effective research area would be to ensure more cooperation on the basis of more Community objectives and flexible use of resources. Let us do away with techno-nationalism. The research policies of the Member States and that of the Union are currently pursued alongside each other without forming a coherent whole. In addition, we invest significantly less in research than the United States and Japan. These two factors mean that the ground lost to the United States has simply increased in the last few years.
In my first report on the European Research Area, I also went on about techno-nationalism, which has to vanish. Greater cooperation is needed between the Member States, researchers and research groups, but also between companies, universities and public research institutes. More coordination at a programme level is also necessary. There is a need for new forms of European cooperation, namely intermediary cooperation, or in other words between national research institutes as well as between the establishments which subsidise research in the Member States. But, ladies and gentlemen, cooperation in Europe will stand or fall with a state-of-the-art infrastructure. It is vital to extend a high-speed trans-European research network with a capacity of ten gigabits to a hundred gigabits in the future, in order to achieve a European Research Area and enable it to perform optimally. Only then will we also achieve cooperation such as that between centres of excellence. This goal will never be reached with the SEAN project, which is based on an increase of two gigabits per second per year. I therefore call upon Commissioners Liikanen and Busquin to show much more ambition in this matter.
As well as the creation of a European Research Area, we also have need of a European Educational Area, since a dynamic knowledge-based economy, which was talked about so much in Lisbon, requires not only high quality education at the same level in all Member States, but also mobility amongst researchers and students. Greater harmony between higher education and researcher training is necessary as well. I would like to hear the Commissioner's point of view on this matter.
The agreements reached in Nice concerning flexibility, variable geometry, or cooperation between a limited number of Member States in the field of research, create an obstacle for the Industry Committee. This forms a central part of Commissioner Busquin's plans. The Industry Committee expresses the strongest possible reservations concerning this cooperation between Member States, particularly if it involves spending European research funds. As it so happens, the Research Committee, this Parliament in other words, has the power of codecision where research at European level is concerned. If this brings about cooperation between the Member States, whereby the Member States finance this themselves, then there is no problem at all. But as soon as European funding is put into research from which only a couple of Member States profit as a result, then the codecision procedure will indeed have to be retained. That is laid down in the Treaty. That is why I would like to see the details of these plans take on a clearer shape, although we are definitely not opposed to more cooperation - because for all that, I have also said: let us do away with techno-nationalism - but as soon as European funding is in the picture, Parliament's power of codecision remains.
Another point is the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in the field of research. In the fifth Framework Programme we argued in favour of spending at least 10% on small and medium-sized enterprises within the thematic programmes. That was successful too. It appears that even more funding is going to small and medium-sized enterprises from the Fifth Framework Programme. In my report for the Industry Committee, we established once again that at least 10% must be spent on SMEs. Nevertheless I believe that having regard to current spending we can well afford to be a bit more ambitious, so I put it to you that in the coming Framework Programme the amount should be increased to 15% and, of course, I welcome your views on this as well.
One last point, Mr President, relates to an issue about which there is considerable doubt in Parliament and that is nuclear fusion research. Essentially, Parliament has very little to report on this, except that we do have to make the budget available. We were surprised, therefore, that you went to the Council to ask for their opinion on what should happen now with fusion, even before you made a statement yourself which would normally go to the Council and Parliament at the same time. I think that that is a slight reversal of the procedure. We hope therefore that you will ask our opinion on this as well and indeed also give an opinion on the budget that you would like to have seen, but we shall have to approve that first. So in fact we are asking to be fully involved in determining the policy regarding fusion research, as well as in determining the direction that it should take.
Mr President, as Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel has said, research has consistently been identified as the key to improving economic growth, creating new jobs, a cleaner environment and better health. How utterly astonishing, then, that every country in the world and every Member State of the European Union wastes half of its most valuable resource, that is, the brain power of its citizens. It wastes that brain power because it fails to engage women in the task of science adequately.
Women are not encouraged at school level, they face discrimination in their careers, and this is something which we have to tackle in the European Research Area. I congratulate Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, the rapporteur, and Commissioner Busquin, both of whom have realised the importance of this gap. I am particularly pleased that Commissioner Busquin has upgraded the work of his directorate-general in this matter to the status of a unit, that he is ensuring that statistics are being kept, and that networks which help and encourage women scientists are being supported by the European Union. This must be a key part of the European Research Area.
We need, as the phrase goes, research by women, for women - so that the gender implications of the research we undertake are examined - and about women. It is important that the socio-economic aspects of the research programme concentrate on gender matters. Why is it that almost every country in the world wastes the brains of half its population by not encouraging them?
I thank Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for her support of the Committee on Women's Rights' opinion and look forward to the gender perspective being an important aspect of the European Research Area.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am happy to be speaking after Mrs McNally, for I myself am a research scientist and I am carrying out research into women (it is not just a question of research carried out by and for women, but also of research about them). I am glad that the report takes these questions on board.
I am speaking today on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, which unanimously adopted a report, part of which has been incorporated into the report by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy; I want to emphasise the word "part".
First of all, I am very glad that the human and social sciences will henceforth be regarded not just as a means of research but also as an end. The issue of women is part of the question, but, of course, today we are discussing something much wider. The fact that human and social sciences are now becoming a field of research in their own right means that we have reached a turning point in research in Europe. I think that needs pointing out. Perhaps it will help us think about how to achieve the political and cultural integration of Europe, given that research is an element of this integration.
I was also struck by the emphasis placed on the extent to which the new technologies, which are so important today - we discussed that yesterday, in relation to copyright - promote cultural diversity through the question of languages. That is another point we in the Committee on Culture consider extremely important.
As for the Sixth Framework Programme, I am pleased to see that the research on cultural identity that we proposed has been incorporated into the report that the Committee on Industry adopted. I hope the Commission will also take this into account. I think it is important to have the possibility of carrying out research on cultural identity, as it is to renew some of the key actions of the Fifth Framework Programme, such as 'multimedia content and tools' and 'city of tomorrow and cultural heritage'.
I somewhat regret, however, that the Committee on Industry has not incorporated our opinion on Internet costs. Research on Internet costs could have made it possible to reduce them and finally make the Internet more democratic. As for networks of excellence, that is all very well, but we can also, within the European Research Area, create networks that are not just networks of excellence. That is something we also need for the sake of mobility but also for the sake of research itself.
Lastly, of course, there is the question of intellectual property. It could be a great help to Europe in safeguarding its cultural identity and democracy if research were carried out on the technical aspects of intellectual property rights.
Mr President, I should first like to thank Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel for being so very open and receptive to contributions from my group. I must reiterate what a pleasure it has been to work with her on these matters. Likewise, I should like to express our sincere appreciation to Commissioner Busquin for his constant readiness to take our contributions on board. His door is always open, he is increasing his contacts with the groups and we are grateful to him for that. I do not believe it is an exaggeration to venture to say that as regards working with Parliament his conduct has been exemplary This bodes very well for the Sixth Framework Programme.
Mr President, the European Union is not the product of constructivist rationalism, of enlightened tyrannical elites who impose themselves on the people. Rather, it arises from the very promising idea of working together. If there is one area where the European Union was in need of stimulus to integrate policies, broaden the area of cooperation, coordination and synergies, it is the area of research, development and technological innovation. Consequently, the European Research Area is one of the key concerns of the present College of Commissioners. Commissioner Busquin is to be credited with launching and developing such an ambitious idea.
The European Research Area does in fact introduce new and potentially very beneficial instruments. Examples of these are cooperation and coordination regarding the research policies of Member States, concentrating on a small number of promising priorities, exploiting to the full the concept of added European value, the notion of large scale projects and of networks of excellence. There is no doubt that if proper use were made of these instruments they would all play their part in improving the quality and competitiveness of our system of research, development and innovation.
Mr President, our amendments arose out of a number of concerns. To give you some examples: to facilitate the movement of researchers, which we consider essential, to ensure openness and cross-fertilisation amongst the research systems of the Member States, to improve basic research and to establish clearly the criteria which will allow us to set priorities.
The European Research Area creates new expectations and is a source of great hope for us all. We wish you success, Commissioner, because your success in this field will be Parliament' s success and the European Union' s success too. Rest assured: as you move forward along the route you have presented so enthusiastically, you will find us marching shoulder to shoulder with you.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 15 February 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, on 22 February there were unfortunately two more additions to the intolerable list of victims killed in ETA terrorist attacks in Spain.
The bomb attack in San Sebastian was directly targeted at Ignacio Dubreil, a local councillor of the Basque Socialist Party in Ordizia. The explosion killed Jos ngel Santos and Jos Leonet, employees of Electra, and four further people were injured, including Mr Dubreil.
Once again, ETA terrorists have shown that they deny the right to life and reject the very principle of the rule of law. On behalf of the House, I have sent a message of our deepest sympathy to the families of the victims and wishes for the prompt recovery of those injured in the attack. I now ask you to please stand and observe a minute' s silence.
Relating to the agendas for the sittings on Wednesday 28 February and Thursday 1 March, I have a number of amendments to put to you, at the request of the political groups.
Relating to Wednesday: I propose that the Commission communication on human resources in the context of reform, to be presented by Mr Prodi and Mr Kinnock on behalf of the Commission, should be brought forward in the agenda. That means we would be timetabling this communication between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m., because the Commission already took a decision at its meeting this morning.
Secondly, I propose to also bring forward the debate on Mrs Haug' s report on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget in relation to the BSE crisis, to be dealt with immediately after the Commission communication.
Finally, at the request of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, and with the agreement of the political groups, I propose entering on the agenda a Commission statement by Mr Byrne on developments in the situation with regard to foot-and-mouth disease. After this statement we will have a thirty minute question-and-answer session, according to the usual procedure.
Finally, in order to make the necessary time available, the report by the delegation to the Conciliation Committee on environmental inspections would be withdrawn, as would the report by Mr Wijkman, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Action Plan to improve energy efficiency in the European Community. These two reports will be taken off the agenda.
The Council and Commission statements on the air attacks against Iraq have been entered as the first item on the agenda. This debate will not conclude with a resolution. Finally, there will be a joint debate on two reports drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on association agreements, Mr Marset Campos' s report on Mercosur and Mr Salafranca Snchez-Neyra' s report on Chile and the votes will be held, as scheduled, at 11 a.m.
Madam President, this is not really an objection. It is just that I find it rather unfortunate that we shall not be adopting a resolution, as expected, following the debate on the air strikes against Iraq. This strikes me as a very important issue, particularly in the context of infringement of the principles governing common foreign and security policy.
You are right, Mr Gollnisch, that is not an objection to the agenda. So, shall we agree that the agenda has been finalised?
Madam President, I would like to raise an issue which is closely related to the debate on the future of Europe. Furthermore, I am delighted that President Prodi is present, and I believe that the Council is also present. I have discovered, by means of a communication to the three European schools - and the Members of this House well know that the European schools are highly active when it comes to approving the budget - that on 7 March a debate will be held with the pupils of the European School, section III, in which the President-in-Office of the Council and Swedish Prime Minister, Mr Persson, the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, and the Prime Minister of the Belgian Federal Government, Mr Verhofstadt, will participate.
I think that this is a good initiative, but I notice that neither the European Parliament nor the Belgian Parliament will be present, although Mr Verhofstadt will be. And having reread the fourth Annex of the Nice Council conclusions, it seems to me that this initiative, which only brings together members of the Council, does not respond to that debate, which the members of the Nice Council remind us of so insistently. Madam President, I believe that this requires an explanation from you and that you should also approach the very august members of the Council to tell them that, if they want to speak with civil society - in this case the pupils of the school - they must take account of the Parliaments, as they emphasised in the fourth Annex.
Thank you very much, Madam President. I await your explanation. I would also ask President Prodi, who is present, and the Council to give us theirs.
Mr Barn Crespo, it is perfectly clear. You are well aware that we had indeed been informed that the Council was planning an initiative for 7 March this year, which it hoped would be common to all three institutions. You will doubtless remember that I discussed this prospect at length at the last Conference of Presidents, although at the time I did not have any details as to the form the proposed initiative would take. The Conference of Presidents decided to grant me a mandate and to entrust me with the task of determining, on the basis of the details provided for my information, whether the European Parliament' s involvement in this initiative would be appropriate or not. I even remember, Mr Barn Crespo, your saying at the time that the European Parliament would not just be participating in order to be included in the photo.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this morning I take great pleasure in conveying a message of thanks to you this morning. Last week in Prague I had the opportunity of meeting Mr Ivan Pilip, a Member of the Czech Parliament. Mr Pilip was detained for 26 days in a Cuban jail for having established links with dissidents. He is now back in the Czech Republic, is in good spirits and thanks the President and also the Members of the European Parliament for their efforts towards his release. Mr Pilip remarked that the Czech public also felt great satisfaction in the friendship forged for his benefit between the European Parliament and the Czech state and Czech members of parliament. He is convinced that our intervention in particular played a significant role in securing his release. I would like to make it clear that I personally played very little part in this process so I am all the more delighted to be able to pass on his thanks.
The next item is the statements by the Council and Commission on air strikes in Iraq.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I welcome this opportunity to comment on a topical and important issue. On Friday 16 February, as we all know, American and British warplanes attacked military targets outside Baghdad. As we also know, the background to these attacks was said to be an increase in Iraqi anti-aircraft fire aimed at the British and American war planes patrolling what are known as the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq. The Americans and the British have made statements emphasising that the actions were taken in self-defence, as well as the fact that they were routine and must not be seen as an escalation of, or change to, the policy. We also know that several countries have been critical of the actions.
The UN Security Council briefly discussed this issue in informal consultations on 20 February when statements were also made reflecting expected positions. The UN' s Secretary-General has also commented on what happened and said, 'Obviously, the timing is a bit awkward for the talks I am going to have on 26 February' . That was the Secretary General' s reference to the high-level talks which have just now been concluded between the UN' s Secretary-General and Iraq' s Foreign Minister and which therefore took place last Monday.
The Presidency notes that there are different views within the European Union about the basis in international law for these military actions, including the maintenance of what are called the no-fly zones. We know that one Member State took part in the actions and that other Member States have complained about what happened. At the same time, we know that the common foreign and security policy implies a common position.
The common foreign and security policy is being developed gradually at the pace decided by the Member States and will obviously be that much stronger if the EU' s Member States hold a common view. At the same time, we must respect the fact that there are issues we view differently. In this connection, I would nonetheless take a positive view of the dialogue embarked upon in New York between the UN' s Secretary-General and the Iraqi Government. We obviously hope that the talks can help break the deadlock and that Iraq will make up its mind to cooperate with the UN and the UN' s weapons inspectors on the basis of the current Security Council resolutions.
It might also be noted that the American Secretary of State, Colin Powell, has recently come out in favour of an overhaul of the American policy of sanctions. Mr Powell has also expressed the hope that, within a couple of weeks, the United States might present its ideas on such an overhaul in more detail.
The conditions under which the Iraqi people have to live, together with lasting security and stability in the region, are the most important issues for the Council when it comes to the latter' s policy towards Iraq. The Council is at present investigating the EU' s opportunities for making humanitarian and cultural contributions, especially to the 'oil for food' programme, within the framework of the UN Security Council' s existing resolutions on Iraq. It is important for the Iraqi Government to cooperate if it is to be possible to implement such a programme.
Security Council Resolution No 1284, adopted on 17 December 1999, allows for a suspension of the sanctions, provided that the Iraqi Government cooperates fully with the UN' s inspectors responsible for disarmament in Iraq.
The Presidency has just explained the background to the recent air raids. I do not wish to go over the same ground so let me just say that I agree fully with the assessment of the situation which we have just heard. I agree very much with the distinction, which I thought was nicely made, between the first efforts to create a common foreign and security policy and the ambition that many have for a single foreign and security policy. I also agree very much with what was said about the differences between Member States on this issue.
I would like to say a few words about the wider picture. I would like to say a word or two about the sanctions and the efforts to improve the miserable lot of the Iraqi people. We all agree that the stalemate over the Iraq sanctions and the suffering which that stalemate has caused is extremely unsatisfactory and we should do all that we can to avoid it continuing.
We must bear in mind, however, that the sanctions were put in place originally for a purpose. As a result of the Gulf War the UN Security Council established through a number of resolutions that Iraq should dispose of all weapons of mass destruction and that this should be verified by UNSCOM, the UN Special Committee with responsibility for dismantling Iraq' s arsenal of weapons and maintaining a monitoring programme to ensure that it was never rebuilt. Until this was achieved it was agreed that Iraq would be subject to various economic sanctions though exceptions were allowed for essential humanitarian supplies. Although they could have done it straight away, back in 1991, the Iraqi Government did not take steps to set up an arrangement with the UN before 1995, when Iraq agreed to the 'oil for food' facility as set out in the UN Security Council resolution that year. The 'oil for food' facility has since then been extended every six months with improved conditions. In principle the 'oil for food' facility should provide basic humanitarian aid without recourse to outside assistance. However, the management of the programme and cooperation with the Iraqi Government in implementing it, is not effective. There is no shortage of funds available to the Iraqi authorities through the 'oil for food' facility to buy food and medicine for their people. It is the Iraqi regime which has chosen not to do this, not to use the opportunity offered to them by the international community.
The issue of sanctions, worsened of course, when UNSCOM was expelled from Iraq in November 1998 and it took a year to agree to a common approach to deal with this problem. The UN Security Council adopted Resolution No 1284 in December 1999 which allowed for a suspension of the sanctions against Iraq following arms monitoring. However Iraq did not accept the resolution and resisted any cooperation on verification of dismantling of weapons of mass destruction. Iraq has not therefore complied with the UN Security Council resolution, a point made I recall in the European Parliament' s resolution of April last year.
We have now reached an important point in our dealings with Iraq. The sanctions which have been in place for 10 years have clearly not achieved their desired objectives. They are perceived to be exacerbating the humanitarian condition of the Iraqi people. The recklessness of Saddam Hussein and his regime has resulted in malnutrition, ill-health and widespread degradation of the physical and social infrastructure of the country. This policy will have consequences beyond the present which will be borne by future generations of Iraqis.
These dire circumstances have brought into focus the plight of the Iraqi people and the problem of dealing with a regime which is as ruthless as it is reckless. We all agree that there is clearly a need to re-think the whole Iraqi issue and to identify the best course of action to take. The new US Secretary of State, Colin Powell, has said as much.
We must not lose sight of the basic objective. We must make sure that we will never again give Saddam Hussein the means to pursue aggression against his neighbours, or indeed against his own people. The sanctions remain in place but we should look at how we could make them more effective in pursuit of the basic objective. We want to focus on the Iraqi leadership and their weapons, not on the Iraqi people and Iraqi society. The international community should explore the possibility of replacing the present sanctions regime by, what is called in the jargon, "a smart sanctions programme" and other appropriate measures whilst seeking to ensure that weapons of mass destruction are not manufactured.
The suffering of the Iraqi people is very much a concern of the European Union. Since the Gulf War in 1991, Europe has been the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq with over EUR 250 million. For the last two years, the European Union has provided assistance of between EUR 8 and 10 million on an annual basis. For 2001 the amount may be somewhat higher at around EUR 12 million. The assistance, through ECHO, focuses on provision of clean drinking water and health facilities, with special emphasis on institutions for the handicapped, for orphans, and with emphasis as well on street children. The ECHO assistance is provided through international non-governmental organisations and through the appropriate UN agencies.
The Commission welcomes the resumption on February 26 and 27 in New York of the dialogue between the United Nations and Iraq. Although no significant breakthrough has been reported from the two-day meeting between the UN Secretary-General and the Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs, it is encouraging that there is an agreement for further talks. Signals should be sent to the Iraqi Government of the importance of continuing the talks and of reaching an agreement with the United Nations that allows the improvement of the economic and humanitarian situation in Iraq, while at the same time respecting the various UN resolutions on Iraq, particularly on the question of weapons of mass destruction.
Mr President, beyond the polemic to which these military interventions may have given rise and quite apart from the fact that the allies might have been consulted, I believe that what our debate today is really about is how, on the one hand, to pursue a coherent policy of respect for international law by the international community - and I am thinking here of the twelve resolutions approved by the United Nations Security Council - and, on the other hand, to take account at the same time, as Mr Patten said, of the suffering now being endured by the Iraqi people.
That is the position from which I should like to tackle this problem, but not without first laying a very secure foundation. I believe it has been wisely said that no-one has caused more suffering to the Iraqi people and Iraqi society than the country' s present regime, and I believe it would be correct to recognise too that no-one has derived as much personal profit from this suffering as the Iraqi regime itself.
From this perspective, I should like to address a number of questions to the Commission and the Council. Mr Patten has stolen a march upon us this morning by suggesting a line of thought we might pursue concerning the way in which we should proceed, and I should like to ask the Council of Ministers whether it thinks that an embargo is or is not essential in order to achieve the objective - which my political group shares one hundred per cent - of preventing Iraq from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
I believe that - as Mr Patten has just explained - the Commission and the European Union as a whole can have a very clear conscience in the sense that we are the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq, but I believe that we should carry out a serious analysis and ponder the results of the 'oil for food' programme, given that many Arab countries believe that the Iraqi authorities are committing fraud to the tune of more than USD 1 000 million per year.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 1 March 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, last week I learnt, to my great sadness, of the death of two former Members, Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mr Lambrias. They both passed away on 3 March 2001.
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz was one of the great characters of the German Green Party and a fervent supporter of the anti-nuclear campaign. She was Member of this House from 1989 to 1999, and, in particular, she was Vice-Chairman of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance of the European Parliament. She was an honest political fighter and even those who did not share her beliefs always respected her for her unwavering commitment.
Mr Lambrias was a Member of this House for 15 years, between 1984 and 1999. He was Vice-Chairman of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats. All Members who knew him appreciated his human qualities and his strong commitment to European integration.
I would like to express my condolences to both families, to the Group of the Greens and to the PPE-DE Group and I would ask you to observe a minute' s silence in memory of our two colleagues who have passed away.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you are aware, there has been another terrorist attack in Spain since our last part-session. During the night of 8 March, Iaki Totorika Vega, a member of the Ertzaintza, the Basque regional police force, was killed in a car bomb explosion in Hernani. On my own behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament, I have expressed our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the victim' s family. I have also sent a message to the Spanish Government stating our unconditional support in its fight against terrorism and I would ask you to rise and observe a minute' s silence to pay tribute to Iaki Totorika, and to all the members of the security forces who work so courageously, often putting their lives at risk, for peace in the Basque region.
You will also be aware of the terrible accident that took place in northern Portugal when the bridge at Entre-os-Rios collapsed, claiming the lives of more than 70 people. On behalf of the European Parliament, I immediately sent our condolences to the Portuguese Prime Minister, Mr Guterres, to assure him that our thoughts are with the Portuguese people at a time of such suffering.
I again ask you to observe a minute' s silence to show our respect for the memory of the victims.
The Minutes of the sitting of 1 March have been distributed.
Madam President, I refer to the speech by Mr Manuel Medina Ortega during the last part-session, and would ask you to consider the following request. Since Mr Medina Ortega's speech concerning the application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell'Utri, a number of reports have appeared in the press, and rumours are rife in this House. As the Group of the Party of European Socialists, we believe that it would be helpful if you, Madam President, put an end to these rumours by granting the request which I wish to put to you - although I realise that you are under no obligation to do so - namely to permit me to address three brief and very precise questions on this issue to you. The Members of this House trust that your answers will clarify the matter. Madam President, I believe that this would serve the interests of the House itself and also the performance of your office.
I would therefore be most grateful if you would perhaps grant my request - and, I repeat, you are not obliged to do so - in view of the political sensitivity of this matter.
Mr Schulz, I do apologise but I do not fully understand which part of the Minutes you are referring to. We are currently discussing the approval of the Minutes. Is there something that you would like to be corrected?
Madam President, it concerns the speech by Mr Medina Ortega, referring to Rule 6(1) of the Rules of Procedure in connection with the Spanish Supreme Court's application for the removal of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell'Utri.
Your point does not refer to the Minutes of 1 March. I shall gladly reply to any questions that you wish to ask when we deal with points of order. I think that it would be unwise to surreptitiously start to deal with points of order before the agenda has been approved, as this was something that we changed, to the overall satisfaction of, I think, nearly all Members.
I declare the 2001-2002 session of the European Parliament open.
Mr President, I rise to ask whether you share my concern about the recent decision of the European Court of Justice in the Bernard Connolly case. Do you agree with me that this is an outrageous affront to free speech and that it flies directly in the face of the so-called Charter of Fundamental Rights? If so, will you please write to the European Court of Justice expressing our concern over this issue.
Mr President, I addressed the House in January on the issue of the frequency of flight cancellations in Amsterdam. I said then that one in two flights were being cancelled. Well, the same thing happened again yesterday: once again, the flight from Amsterdam was cancelled. I would ask the President to come to a better arrangement with Air France.
Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development. Mr President, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development rejects the request of the Council for urgent procedure. It is our opinion that we have time to write a proper report. We will not delay with this report as there are agreements among the parliamentary groups that we will complete this report by May and put it to the vote in Parliament in May, so that there will be sufficient time to vote on this matter. Another reason why we do not want an urgent procedure is because, as you know, in Nice we were not able to secure participation for the European Parliament in decision-making in the agricultural sphere. If we agree to an urgent procedure now, we would relinquish the possibility of participating, as we would then be out of the picture altogether. It is our opinion, however, that the Council is very divided on this issue and that the decisive proposals and decisive formulas for compromise must be found by the European Parliament. I therefore ask that the request for urgent procedure be rejected.
I would like to remind you that, yesterday, Parliament adopted the decision, in principle, to include Council and Commission statements on foot-and-mouth disease on the agenda. Since the agenda is extremely full, the only way to include this point without having to remove something else would be to cut short Question Time. Therefore, with the agreement of the other institutions, I propose the following change to the agenda for tomorrow's sitting:
5.30 p.m. to 6.15 p.m.: Council and Commission statements on foot-and-mouth disease, followed by a 30 minute debate. Moreover, I propose not to follow the statements with the tabling of motions for resolution;
6.15 p.m. to 7 p.m.: Question Time to the Council.
Mr President, I think that is a good suggestion. We discussed this yesterday. We were fairly unanimous in the opinion that we should amend the original decision of the Conference of Presidents to bring it up to date. When something is done for current reasons, then, of course, something else is bound to suffer as a result. That is clear. We do not gladly forgo Question Time, but if that is the only option, then I fully support it on behalf of my parliamentary group, too.
Mr President, while I may not see any other option at the moment either, I would nevertheless like to protest against the fact that Question Time increasingly seems to be regarded as fair game, so to speak, when it comes to scheduling. In other words, every time there is a bottleneck, Question Time is cut short. I do not think this is right, as Question Time is safeguarded in the Treaties. It is a fundamental parliamentary right. I think it is ridiculous that we always cut corners in this area. Members submit their questions within the time stipulated and have a right to receive answers to those questions.
Madam President, I wish to inform the House that today is the UK's No Smoking Day. As half a million EU citizens die needlessly each year from smoking yet 80% of smokers want to give up, I hope that colleagues will see fit to sign the tabled written declaration calling for an EU no smoking day. Today alone 1500 EU citizens will die from smoking. Let us, the European Parliament, lead the way in preventing these deaths.
Thank you, Mrs Stihler. I have the feeling that the applause from your fellow Members shows that they have indeed listened to your message and I do not doubt for a single moment that they will all observe the UK' s No Smoking Day.
Madam President, I simply wish to ask whether we could once again check that the no smoking rules in this House are being enforced. It has come to my attention that was not the case earlier this week. I would urge renewed vigour in the application of those rules in this House.
Thank you, Mr Watson. I see that Mrs Banotti has indeed been listening to you, as have the other quaestors, and we shall look into this.
Madam President, as you know I am a very enthusiastic anti-smoker. However, I would just like to remind colleagues that they can smoke in comfort and away from everybody else in the designated area over there to the right at the window.
The next item is the Council and the Commission statements on the follow-up to Nice.
I would like to welcome the President-in-Office. Mrs Lindh, you now have the floor.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, 'I am delighted to see that the Commission has taken concrete steps to include European citizens in a debate that is going to determine the long-term future of the Union.' This is the beginning of the first contribution on the website on the future of Europe from Russell Pickard of the UK. He hopes that as many citizens as possible will express their opinion on fundamental issues such as 'What kind of Europe do we - Europe' s citizens - want?'
'If we want things to change, let us 'be' the change' , writes Vincente Garcia-Delgado Segus from Spain. 'Now every European citizen can say exactly what he or she wants - whether negative or positive - and the responsible leaders in the EU can listen to the citizens and take into account their wishes and hopes' , writes Ann Catherine Talbro from Denmark. Kurt Linderoos from Finland proposes that all EU citizens contact an additional fourteen people, one from every other Member State, to discuss the future of the EU.
Last week, Parliament' s Vice President David Martin, the Prime Ministers of Sweden and Belgium and President Prodi launched the debate on the future of Europe. You, Madam President, the two Prime Ministers and the President of the Commission made a joint statement and the website, which was initiated jointly by Parliament, the Council and the Commission, was opened.
With last week' s launch and today' s debate we are leaving "the follow-up to Nice" behind us and instead entering into the debate on the future of Europe. According to the Nice Declaration, this broad debate on the future of Europe must be followed by a new Intergovernmental Conference in 2004. This year, the Swedish and the Belgian Presidencies will work with Parliament and the Commission to encourage wide-ranging discussions with all parties concerned: representatives of national parliaments and of public opinion, schools and universities and representatives of civil society. We will place great emphasis on what the various political groups in Europe, inside and outside this House, have to say.
We must naturally include young people in this debate - it is their future in Europe we are discussing - as well as the candidate countries, as they too will be involved in building the Europe of the future. The entire process must take place with the greatest possible openness. Our goal is to bring the Union and its institutions closer to its citizens.
According to the decision made in Nice the process will address issues including restricting the competencies of the EU and the Member States so as to reflect the principle of subsidiarity, the future status of the EU' s Charter of Fundamental Rights, simplification of the treaties without changing their content and the role of national parliaments in the structure of Europe.
When we initiated the debate last week at one of the European Schools in Brussels it was clear that the interests of citizens extend far beyond the examples of institutional issues given in Nice. I believe that it is correct and important for us to be able to conduct a broader debate on the future of Europe. If we are to begin this discussion at the right end, we should, just like the school pupils in Brussels and the contributions on the website, ask the fundamental questions of what tasks we want the Union to take on and what role we want the Union to play in Europe and globally.
We have to be able to show our citizens that the EU is a strong force on the important issues: dealing with globalisation, human rights and democracy, a common asylum and immigration policy, employment and growth throughout Europe, combating crime, the environment, sustainable development and food safety.
It is important that we begin this debate with the factual issues, which our citizens can identify with. In this work I really look forward to the contribution of Parliament as it is you Members who have direct contact with your voters around Europe. This house has so often spearheaded important European debates on openness, the environment, expansion, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, to name but a few examples. It is now time to move from discussing form to also discussing facts and substance.
Then it is, of course, also important to return to the question of form, the best way in which we can reform the Union' s institutions and way of working. Let me first say that the community method, which has played such an important role in European cooperation, must naturally retain a strong position in the future too, even if, in some areas, we supplement it with the new open coordination method. A strong Europe requires strong institutions. I noticed this myself when I was environment minister and worked closely with both the Commission and Parliament.
Let me also say that from the Swedish point of view we have an open attitude to the question of the form continued preparations will take. I can see both advantages and disadvantages in the 'convention method' which several players have suggested as an important or possible model for debate.
Madam President, we are at the start of an incredibly exciting process. The future of Europe is now being discussed throughout the Union, from Termonfeckin in Ireland today, to the Canary Islands in Spain next week, the following week in Kiruna in the far north of Sweden and the following day in Sparta in Greece.
Next week, as the first in a line of measures, this Parliament will organise a meeting with participants from the parliaments in the Member States and the candidate countries. I look forward to being involved in the debate next week.
The next item is the report (A5-0072/2001) by Lord Inglewood, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning life assurance [COM(2000) 398 - C5-0351/2000 - 2000/0162(COD)].
Mr President, on behalf of Lord Inglewood I should like to say that he is extremely sorry not to be here, but he is unavoidably detained in the UK for family and business reasons.
This report, which I am pleased to present on his behalf and on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is an important part of the Legal Affairs Committee's remit on behalf of Parliament to encourage simplification and good-quality drafting of Community legislative instruments. In this particular case, quite a lot of important work has been done by the Commission in incorporating and simplifying three texts related to life insurance. The source text dates as far back as 1979 and, apart from the codification process of incorporating amendments that have been made over that period into the legislative text, the reason for this more substantive report is that the Commission has found it necessary to propose a number of amendments to reflect changes that have taken place in the market since that time and to improve the overall quality and integrity of the text.
I do not need to detain the House with a lot of the technical details relating to those texts. Those of you that are experts on the subject will clearly want to refer to the Commission's own text and the Commission has provided an extremely helpful and clear explanatory statement for those of us who are not, unlike Lord Inglewood, distinguished lawyers - which is why he has been able to make such a good job of scrutinising this text on behalf of Parliament.
In view of the work that has been done, our job here is just to ensure that there are no political issues arising out of what is largely a set of technical amendments. Lord Inglewood has taken soundings of the industry. He has looked particularly at the texts of the six amendments, to make sure that they do not introduce any principles outside the directives' original political remit and he is satisfied in this case. Therefore, so far as his report is concerned, he is pleased to recommend adoption of the Commission proposal to the House without any further amendments.
By way of general conclusion, we in the Legal Affairs Committee regard the quality of drafting and simplification of legislation as an important remit. It is worthwhile reminding colleagues throughout the House who are working on legal texts that this is a principle that we all need to bear in mind when we are amending legislative texts of any kind. When we see and look at work in other committees it is not entirely clear that colleagues bear simplification in mind. In many cases we see far too many complicated texts coming out of work done by this House. It is an important principle - maybe this is an uncontroversial issue but the principle of the quality and clarity of legislative instruments is important. I commend this report as a good example of that process.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to make two comments on the Inglewood report. Firstly, I welcome the Commission' s basic principle that legislation that has already been amended several times and no longer gives a clear and coherent picture should have to be codified.
In connection with my recently completed report on the pension funds directive, I also believe that simplification and consolidation of the life assurance directives is urgently required, because that will create clearer distinctions between the different activities and pillars. It is possible that when the pensions fund directive is accepted, insurance companies that are active in the third pillar and therefore also subject to the life assurance directives will in future be subject to the pension funds directive for their company pensions business. Since this likelihood will exist, it is important that what we are doing should be as clear, simple and transparent as possible. The Inglewood report and the simplification and transparency it initiates are therefore a welcome contribution to making things easier for the citizen to understand and therefore a contribution to a living internal market.
On behalf of the European Parliament I would like to welcome to the official gallery the European Affairs Committee of the Nordic Council, led by its Vice-President, Mr ysten Djupedal.
We are delighted to welcome these fellow parliamentarians who represent the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
We hope that your visit to the European Parliament will be both enjoyable and fruitful and we look forward to seeing you again soon.
The proposal for a directive recasting the three generations of life insurance directives is a response to pressure from Parliament, Council, industry and consumers, in fact anyone who has to deal day-to-day with the complexities of the Community insurance legislation.
Your objective is to facilitate the comprehension and application of the insurance directives by setting them out in a legal text that is clear, coherent and complete. Mr Karas has just asked for texts to be as clear and transparent as possible and that was the Commission's aim in the text which is in front of you.
In addition to the codification of the provisions, some minor amendments which do not affect the substance of the texts were considered to be necessary. The exercise has gone beyond a pure codification and that is why this is a 'recast' version. A purely recodified text would have included a considerable number of repetitions, inconsistencies and obsolete provisions.
I intend shortly to present to the Commission and, if the Commission agrees, to Parliament, a parallel proposal for a recast - again recast - version of the non-life insurance directives. Clearly the Community's insurance legislation is not going to be stopped because of the codification exercise. New proposals are being discussed which, once they have been adopted, will require new amendments to the recast directives. We cannot stop the legislation tree growing but we can prune and train it so that it does not become an overgrown tangle as it has been in the past. I am extremely grateful to Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and particularly to the rapporteur, Lord Inglewood, here represented by Mr Harbour, for their efficient handling of this matter. Mr Harbour also just said that this is a good model for other legislation and I entirely agree with him. It is an example of efficiency which Parliament may well want to adopt in other instances as well.
They have appreciated the fact that, although the proposal exceeds the limits of pure codification, it does not really contain any legislative change. It therefore calls for more expeditious consideration than a normal legislative proposal and that is what has happened. They have recommended to Members of Parliament that you should approve this proposal without any amendment and I invite Parliament to follow the recommendation of the rapporteur and approve the proposal without amendments.
The Commission hopes a directive will soon be adopted, if possible with only one reading by this Parliament. That would be a very good example of a fast-track procedure.
The next item is the following oral questions to the Commission:
B5-0015/2001 by Mr de Roo and others, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group,
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 15 March.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is once again my sad duty to have to open this part-session with a condemnation of the ETA terrorist attacks in Spain.
As you know, since 15 March, there have unfortunately been two further additions to the intolerable list of Spanish people whose lives have been lost in these attacks.
During the night of 17 March, Santos Santamara, who was a member of the Mossos d' Esquadra, the Catalan regional police force, was killed in a car bomb explosion in Rosas. On 20 March, Froiln Elespe Inciarte, a Socialist party municipal councillor in Lasarte, was shot twice in the head and killed.
In carrying out these murders, ETA has once again shown its total disregard for democracy and the recent threats made on tourists are examples of the same despicable behaviour.
As on each of these sad occasions, on behalf of the European Parliament and on my own behalf, I have sent our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the families of the victims. I have also sent a message of our support to the Spanish authorities.
I would ask you to observe a minute' s silence.
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 29 March 2001, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
President. With regard to Thursday, I have received two requests for amendments, both concerning the topical and urgent subjects of major importance and the item on human rights. First of all, I have received a request from the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, and from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, to withdraw the first item entitled 'Iran' from the agenda.
Madam President, I should briefly like to explain our request. The reason for it is not that we have become more tolerant of the situation in Iran, but that difficult discussions and negotiations are being held in Iran itself at the present time with a view to improving the lot of a number of Iranian citizens who work in the German Embassy. I do not believe that we should now disrupt this process which is taking place in Iran, perhaps by adopting a resolution. We have firm views on the violations of human rights, but in this case - and, I would stress, at this particular time - I do not believe that we should either hold a debate or adopt a resolution.
Does any Member wish to speak in favour of keeping this item?
There being no speaker, I shall put the request to the vote.
President. The second request is from the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats to withdraw the third item entitled 'Violence towards Catholic nuns' .
Madam President, this is a serious problem, yet limited in terms of scope. At the end of the day, this is about a few priests who spent some time in Africa and who displayed behaviour which was naturally wholly inappropriate and which we do not endorse at all. However, we should not generalise. This was not the Holy See' s policy. Neither is this an urgent matter, because the incidents date back to 1994-1995. Now the Vatican too has taken measures and launched its own inquiry. Steps have since been taken against the priests in question and the relevant details have been disclosed. Accordingly, my group proposes not to include this topic in the urgent and topical debate. Needless to say, it is entirely logical in our view, and we would also appreciate it if we were to discuss this topic within the parliamentary committees, for that - and not the urgent and topical debate - is the appropriate forum.
Does any Member wish to speak in favour of keeping this item?
Mr President, on page 18 of the Minutes, I am reported as having requested that Mr Imbeni adopt a stance now that he is in Cuba. However, what is at issue is the fact that Mr Imbeni will be making a statement on behalf of the European Parliament in compliance with the resolutions which the European Parliament has always adopted on Cuba. Parliament did this for the last time on 11 March 1999. Mr Imbeni, in fact, declared on 21 March to Agence Presse - and this what Mr Barn Crespo' s subsequent question, on page 19, addressed to me was about - that he did not intend to make a statement. This is not a private visit, but an official one by Mr Imbeni on behalf of the European Parliament. That is why we are urging him to make a statement on the human rights situation in Cuba. One can make wonderful statements in the European Parliament, but actually doing it in situ is a mark of greater courage.
Mr van Velzen, I have taken note of that. I recall that the President told you yesterday that she would attend to that.
Mr President, I regret the fact that we are discussing this matter once again. Only yesterday, the chairman of my parliamentary group extolled the qualities and the sincerity of Mr Imbeni, and the way in which he has defended human rights, in Europe and in the rest of the world. I also regret the fact that, once again, an attack has been made on a Vice-President of this House when he is not here to defend himself. I hope that these words of mine will be recorded in the Minutes.
Thank you, Mr Seguro. I do not intend to allow a debate on this subject. If there are any other requests to speak on this, I shall not accept them. The President made it clear yesterday what she intends to do. So that is the end of this item.
Mr President, I have no comments with regard to the Minutes, but I have unfortunately missed a large proportion of this interesting discussion because there are no Dutch interpreting services available at the moment.
I am sorry, Mrs Buitenweg, but it would be pretty difficult to do anything about that at this stage.
If there is no Dutch interpreting, then can I please ask the Sittings Service to do something about that. I am afraid that I cannot do any more at this point.
The next item is the vote on the request for urgent procedure on the following proposal: Proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1251/1999 on the introduction of a support system for producers of certain arable crops [COM(2001) 87 - C5-0083/2001 - 2001/0043(CNS)].
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, will speak in favour of the request.
, chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development. (DE) Mr President, this request for urgent procedure is about the fact that high-protein feed or pulses are to be grown on set-aside land before this year is out. What we have here is an old demand made by Parliament finally taking effect. The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has held negotiations with the Council presidency so that this scheme can be introduced within this year. That is why my committee is supporting this request for urgent procedure. This also provides an opportunity to grant financial compensation to cattle farms hit by the beef crisis caused by BSE, without imposing any additional burden on the budget - and I stress the word additional. And these farms would nevertheless be given income aid through the channel of animal feed. That will please Commissioner Schreyer. I call on the House to vote for this request.
As no one wishes to speak against the request for urgent procedure, we can now proceed to the vote.
Madam President, last month, Parliament adopted a resolution condemning the kidnapping of eight Portuguese citizens by the LFEC. Yesterday, the LFEC released one of those hostages and I should like to welcome this positive gesture by the LFEC and call for it to be followed by seven more positive gestures, in other words, for the remaining seven Portuguese hostages to be released.
We condemn hostage taking as a form of political action and I wish to emphasise this once again now. I would like you, Madam President, to act on our behalf in the following initiative: given that the Portuguese hostage who has just been released is in quite a poor state of health, we request that you ask the LFEC to give an international organisation, namely the Red Cross, immediate access to the seven remaining Portuguese citizens, who are still being held hostage in the enclave of Cabinda, in order to assess their state of health.
As you know, Mr Seguro, I did take action and I am keeping a very close eye on the situation. I shall do as you have just suggested.
Regarding the election of the Vice-President, which is scheduled to take place during today' s voting time, I can inform you that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has proposed Mrs Lalumire as a candidate.
Outcome of the European Council of 23/24 March 2001 in Stockholm including the situation in the Middle East
The next item is the report by the European Council and the statement by the Commission on the outcome of the European Council of 23 and 24 March in Stockholm, including the situation in the Middle East.
Madam President, honourable Members of the European Parliament, I would like to give my and the presidency' s picture of the summit in Stockholm. The meeting comprised two parts; firstly, a follow-up to the Lisbon Process and secondly, discussions on the Union' s foreign relations. There was also a brief discussion of agricultural policy. I will begin by commenting on the Lisbon Process.
The summit in Lisbon provided a powerful direction for the Union in creating a competitive, world-leading, dynamic economy with social cohesion. At the summit in Stockholm, we added four different areas to the Lisbon Process. The first concerns demographic development in Europe which will have a major impact on the social agenda which must be formulated for Europe. This demographic challenge will gradually bring with it anxiety regarding national finances and a lack of labour. Rising to this challenge is a joint necessity for all fifteen Member States. Much work will be required, particularly in the social sphere. This can also be linked to the social agenda which the French Presidency so successfully launched in Nice. The demographic issues will therefore be added to the Lisbon Process.
Secondly: biotechnology. In Lisbon the emphasis was on information technology. We do not wish to drop this - it will continue to be important - but we must also add biotechnology if we are to be an area and a part of the world at the forefront of economic development. This question must therefore also become a priority issue for the Union. We must not flinch at the difficult moral and ethical issues linked to this technology. Our discussions must address these too.
The third point we are adding is that we wish to see a link between social development, financial development and ecological development. That is to say, we cannot have sustainable social cohesion or lasting financial growth if these are not also based upon ecologically balanced social development.
The fourth point we are adding is for the candidate countries to also take part in the Lisbon Process in the future.
These four elements are thus being added but the Lisbon Process is, of course, just a process, a development. It is therefore important for us to realise that we will not achieve everything in terms of the social agenda and economic liberalisation all at once. This will have to take place gradually. The guidelines have been set and have once more been confirmed by the European Council in Stockholm. Our focus is full employment and active welfare states.
With regard to economic liberalisation we took a further step forward in Stockholm. It did not extend as far as the Swedish Presidency would have wished but definite steps were taken in the right direction.
The first issue is the creation of an internal European market for financial services. The first Ecofin meeting in Stockholm was a major breakthrough in the area of financial services and risk capital, which was then confirmed in conjunction with the meeting of the European Council.
We also agreed to proceed further on the directive on postal services. We also agreed that we will abolish the monopoly and open the gas and electricity markets to competition. It is true that we did not achieve the timetable we had hoped for, but this will take place and we emphasise our desire to go down this route. The European Council saw intense debate on the following: If certain Member States open up their gas and electricity markets to competition, will this, in the long term, result in an impossible situation should other Member States refrain from doing so. Should this be the case, we will gradually end up in a situation in which certain companies in monopoly markets are creating profits which will then be used in marketing offensives in other countries which have opened up their markets. This will build in tension in the Union which will be difficult to deal with. It is therefore important that we proceed with the deregulation of the gas and electricity markets as we have proposed in principle, but it must also proceed according to schedule.
The question of European airspace will once more be addressed in Gothenburg in June. We have made progress in this discussion and in this field, too, I am hopeful that we will have reached an agreement on the single European sky before the Swedish Presidency is over.
In the field of finance we will also achieve implementation of the directive on the internal market in national legislation such that 98.5 percent of the directive will be adopted before 2002.
We will also start a new WTO round. We have emphasised the importance of making all the work linked to eEurope more secure. We also said in Stockholm that we will proceed with the Galileo project. This is important. There are still certain things which need to be clarified, for example concerning finance, but we consider this a socially beneficial project which must be carried out and as quickly as possible. Our transport ministers will be discussing the issue further tomorrow.
We also decided that the distorting state aids in the internal market must be reduced by 2003 at the latest. A scoreboard is to be set up for this and made available for all.
This is primarily what was addressed in the discussions on economic issues in Stockholm. As I said earlier, it is a step in the right direction but not as far as we would like to get. This is a process and the direction in which the process is going is incontrovertible. It is that aspect of the Lisbon Process that concerns the economy.
The second aspect of the process is the social agenda. The Europe which is developing is not a Europe which can only be built by deregulating markets. Instead, there must also be an expression of political will to distribute the growing welfare available in Europe in a fair manner so that our citizens can live a rich life. Achieving a balance between economic liberalisation and social responsibility in the conclusions of the meeting in Stockholm has been an aim on the part of the Swedish Presidency.
In terms of the social aspect, a new goal for employment has been set: it is primarily important that we concentrate on those aged over 55 in the European labour force. By the year 2010, 50 percent of this group must be employed, compared with the present 38 percent. We have a new intermediate target for the general employment rate in 2005, namely 67 percent overall and 57 percent for women.
By 2052 we are to have sufficient childcare in Europe to contribute to a social agenda which will enable young men and women to combine responsibility for a professional career with responsibility for the family and children.
In terms of equal opportunities we seek to create not only a social Europe but also a modern Europe. Discriminatory pay differences are to be combated. Indicators for this will therefore be produced to make these differences visible. The Equal Opportunities Directive will be adopted and made more stringent this year, which is also a result of the Stockholm Council.
The President wishes to communicate that the Bureau has a comment. The Spanish version of the Folias resolution on granting discharge for the other institutions has not been corrected, as was requested during voting time. The services will therefore now correct the text of paragraph 19 of the resolution to bring it into line with the original Greek text.
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0079/2001), on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 79/373/EEC on the circulation of compound feedingstuffs and repealing Commission Directive 91/357/EEC [13292/1/2000 - C5-0002/2001 - 2000/0015(COD)] (Rapporteur: Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf) and
Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, this is a lesson in political evolution. An open declaration - I do not need to go into the details - means in the eyes of Parliament that the contents of the declaration must be laid out clearly and unambiguously on the table, so to speak. In 1979 it was turned into a disguised declaration and, since that time, the argument has run and run. It is running in Member States and has long been running here in Parliament and in the Commission.
Right up to the time the Commission presented its proposal, the Commission services tried to make it clear to us that this was an open declaration. This assessment was finally reaffirmed in its own proposal. Parliament then approved this fine proposal after making a few improvements, calling for a positive list for example. Then it went to the Council, where a bit of wheeling and dealing went on, which resulted in a half-open declaration. That was only to be expected from the Council. What disappointed us was the fact that the Commission adapted its proposal, which was reasonable and urgently called for an open declaration, to suit the Council.
In the meantime, I had been in contact with all the associations which were involved in this area: the cooperatives, especially the Association of the Compound Feedingstuffs Industry and the Rural Credit Association of Germany. All of them tried their hardest to explain that this open declaration would not in fact be permissible or implementable. This continued in the Council when the associations were unsuccessful in Parliament. The Council and, as has already been said, the Commission reacted to this.
Now we have a situation where we have a disguised half-open declaration. Interestingly, the then Federal Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany worked on this. He did not, however, issue a protocol stating that he, in fact, wanted the open declaration. When the BSE crisis hit, this Minister wrote to me saying that, as rapporteur and chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, I should make sure the open declaration was implemented with no ifs or buts. And that was the very Minister who had been in favour of the half-open declaration. A real lesson in political culture.
Now we are faced with a different situation in Member States, especially in Germany, and once again we have a wave of excitement over BSE. Now, all those who before had their foot on the brakes are coming and telling us to implement the open declaration. This is now our task. My suggestion is that we stick with the original Commission proposal and our amendments. We, in this Parliament, will implement the open declaration. We will enter into negotiations with the Council and, if necessary, we will frustrate them in Parliament and put the blame on the Council if political groups do not get what they want.
Commissioners - those of you who are involved in this - I guess you will just have to get used to the fact that this Parliament will endorse my recommendation. I hope we have you on our side and that, in your role as mediator, which you have to assume, you will support our position in the negotiations which must get under way with the Council, as we are now at the codecision procedure stage. We are on the right track. We want the open declaration with no ifs or buts and we also want the positive list. Mr Byrne, in our proposal for an amendment, we are giving the Commission a goal to aim for. Not immediately, we know this is not possible, but by the end of the year, we want at least a Commission proposal which will signal to us what direction it could go in. You see, we are prepared to make compromises here too.
Commission. (DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I do not want to go into what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just said as David Byrne will make a statement on this at the end of the debate. I would like to clarify the issue of so-called protein deficits. On 4 December last year, the Commission was invited by the Agriculture Council to analyse the situation of the market for protein-rich plants and to draw the appropriate conclusions from this analysis. At the time the invitation was extended, it was made clear that all Commission proposals had to move within the framework of the financial forecast agreed in Berlin.
A few days later, the European Council in Nice defined the Commission obligation more precisely and called for a detailed analysis of supply and demand for oleaginous and protein crops to be carried out under strict compliance with the financial parameters agreed in Berlin. The Commission was happy to accept this invitation. It made a detailed investigation of the issues that had been raised and summarised its findings in a working document and in a Council communication to Parliament. What were these findings?
In 2000, approximately 3 million tonnes of animal meal were produced in the European Union. Some 2 million tonnes were exported to third countries and a further half a million tonnes were used in the production of pet food. The remaining 2 million tonnes or so were used as pig swill and poultry feed. With the Council Decision of 4 December last year, the use of such feedingstuffs and such animal protein was banned for all agricultural livestock. As you know, until then they had only been banned for ruminants.
The key issue here is to determine whether replacing the shortfall in animal meal by vegetable crops is a problem and, if not, how this should best be brought about. To be able to assess the changed demand for feedingstuffs we must first take a look at the development of meat consumption and meat production. The analysis contained in the working document is based on the assumption that the per-capita consumption of beef in the wake of the BSE crisis of 1996 will start to recover in the coming three to five years. This should mean an increase in both the consumption and production of pork and poultry meat. There are also two factors which determine the demand for feedingstuffs in pig and poultry production, firstly, the lack of animal meal and, secondly, the expected rise in production.
To replace animal meal in feedingstuffs for pigs and poultry, primary consideration will be given to soya meal, then rapeseed and sunflower meal, peas, beans and sweet lupins. Cereals are also taken into account even though the protein content of cereals is relatively low. In practice the composition of feedingstuffs will be determined by the price and availability of raw materials and technical constraints.
The combined effect of all these variables is difficult to predict and it is even more difficult to isolate the changes brought about by the ban from normal market adjustments or the consequences of political measures. The current price ratio between cereals and soya will trigger three main reactions in the feedingstuffs industry and among farmers. Firstly, as prices for oilseed meal are relatively high in comparison with cereals, the proportion of protein-rich feedingstuff ingredients will be reduced to the physiologically requisite minimum. As a result, in comparison with previous years, especially 1998 and 1999 when soya prices were extremely low, the total quantity of raw protein in animal feed has fallen.
Secondly, the proportion of cereals in animal feed should increase. Cereals are admittedly suppliers of energy rather than protein, but with an average protein content of 10% to 12%, the 5 million extra tonnes of cereals which will be fed to animals this year will supply half a million tonnes of raw protein.
Thirdly, the remaining gaps will be filled by additional imports of soya meal. In view of the slight drop in the total quantity used and the additional quantity resulting from cereals, there is expected to be a soya requirement in the order of one to one and a half million tonnes.
What options have we examined to close these expected gaps? Firstly, we have looked into the possibility of increasing the aid quotient to EUR 74 per tonne, rather then keeping it at the same level as cereals, namely at a level of EUR 63 per tonne, as was decided in Agenda 2000. The disadvantage of this option is that it would re-introduce crop-specific aid for oilseeds and production would be subject to the upper ceiling set out in the Blair House agreement. Furthermore, if this option were chosen, around EUR 1 270 per tonne of soya meal equivalent more would have to be spent on additional subsidies, which is 6 times more in additional subsidies than soya currently costs. The budget costs for this option would amount to some EUR 475 million a year.
The second option we have examined is to increase the aid quotient for peas, beans and sweet lupins by EUR 6. We opted for EUR 6 because such an increase would be covered by the peace clause in the WTO. Simulations have shown that, with the current price ratio between protein crops and cereals, this increase would only lead to a very small increase in cultivated areas. This would lead to extra expenditure, which would be higher than the price of any additionally imported soya, since the entire crop has to be paid for out of this increased subsidy.
Thirdly, we have assessed the consequences the planting of protein-rich crops would have on set-aside land. If crops are sown on set-aside land which are then in competition on the market with cereals and oilseeds, this would result in the blue-box eligibility of land premiums in cereal production being called into question, quite apart from the fact that such a step would trigger severe international criticism.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 5 April.
The order of business was established on 2 April, but I have received a number of proposals for amendments.
The Commission communication will deal with our partnership with the United Nations in the areas of development and humanitarian issues and will be made by Commissioner Nielson.
The second item of information I have is that on 11 April, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market approved the report by Mr MacCormick on the request for the waiver of Mrs Jeggle' s immunity. Pursuant to Rule 6(6) of the Rules of Procedure, this report has been placed at the head of the agenda and will be followed immediately by Mr Zimeray' s report on the request for the waiver of Mr Voggenhuber' s immunity.
Madam President, according to Rule 6(6) of the Rules of the Procedure, committee reports concerning immunity of Members shall be placed at the head of the agenda. Recent events have reminded us that questions of immunity are not mere matters of form, but go to the substance of great issues of democracy in Europe and you have, indeed, alluded to that yourself.
Are you certain that it satisfies Rule 6(6) to take these issues of immunity after the Commission communication which appears to have been placed at the head of the agenda ahead of the issues of immunity? Is that a correct interpretation of Rule 6?
Mr MacCormick, you are quite right and you will be pleased, since the three reports on waivers of immunity have been placed at the head of the agenda, after the Commission communication and before Mr Cashman' s report on public access to documents.
Madam President, am I right in assuming that the item on Turkish prisoners on hunger strike has not been included in today' s agenda?
Yes, Mr Wurtz, you are right. The Council did not believe that it was in a position to make this statement. Of course, there would not be much point without the Council. The Council can, however, attend the sitting of 14 May.
In my view, this answer, not the one you gave, Madam President, but the answer given by the Council, is unacceptable and we should not accept it.
When I wrote to you on 25 April, you were, in fact, in favour of this yourself. I believe I am right in saying that all the political groups were also in favour of this. At that time, 17 prisoners had died. Since then, there have been a further two deaths. A further 160 prisoners are in a critical condition. I think that the Council' s response to postpone this debate to some other later date is an unacceptable, bureaucratic answer. We cannot allow the number of victims of the hunger strike to increase with each passing day, nor can we shirk our responsibilities.
If, as I understand it, the Swedish Minister for Justice will be present at this sitting to talk about the Cashman report, one cannot imagine that he would refuse to respond to our request, in other words, to send the Turkish government an urgent request to resume negotiations with the prisoners' representatives so that this dreadful slaughter can be brought to an end.
Thank you, Mr Wurtz. Just to clarify matters, it is Mrs Lejon, Minister for Democratic Issues, Public Administration and Consumer Policies, who will be present. Mr Danielsson is currently on a visit to Korea and so the only minister who will be available is Mrs Lejon, and she does not believe that she is in a position to address this issue.
Madam President, it would, of course, have been good if we could have debated this urgent matter here today. I would like to remind you and the House that Mr Daniel Cohn-Bendit, and for part of the time, I myself have been in Turkey over the last few days as part of a very spontaneous action. Mr Cohn-Bendit is, of course, chair of the delegation that is to visit Turkey and its prisons in June. We have also had a meeting on this subject today.
Mr Cohn-Bendit and I - to the extent that I was present - made the viewpoint of this House very clear to the Turkish Government, to the Minister for Justice and to the Minister for European Affairs, as we did to the organisations that are organising this hunger strike, to the human rights organisations and to the country's MPs. I particularly wanted to mention that. We have tried, by means of a very spontaneous action, and in view of the urgency of this matter, to make the views of this Parliament very clear to the Turkish Government, Parliament and to the human rights organisations.
Mr President, as you know, today is the eleventh World Press Freedom Day. Many of our fellow Members would certainly wish to take this opportunity once again to state their solidarity with this struggle, a struggle, furthermore, which is proving successful, because, according to the Reporters sans Frontires association, fewer journalists are being imprisoned and fewer media outlets are being censured than a year ago.
Nevertheless, the list of sources of pressure and oppression against journalists is a long one. Amongst the states which 'Reporters sans Frontires' accuses, such as Burma, Syria, China, Ethiopia, Tunisia and many others, we can now increasingly add various mafias, terrorist groups and fundamentalist movements. Just in the last few days, we were saddened to learn that Brice Fleutiaux, the French reporter who had been held hostage for several months in Chechnya and on whose behalf we intervened, was unable to overcome the depression that affected him as a result of his incarceration, and took his own life. I therefore believe that this Day must be an opportunity to give impetus to our collective commitment to this essential element of democracy.
That is indeed the case, Mr Wurtz. We have certainly taken account of the statement you have just made.
I have taken the floor today to call on the Presidency to send a letter, or take any other measure it deems appropriate, with regard to what is happening to Afro-Colombian communities on the Pacific coast of Colombia at the moment. Together with a group of other Members of Parliament, I wrote to Colombia in December, because these Afro-Colombian communities were being threatened. The day before yesterday, seven members of these communities were murdered. I am in possession of the details of the names and ages of the victims. However, the most serious aspect of this situation is that hundreds of other members of these communities are still being threatened.
We do not have the time to write to Mr Pastrana again. I therefore believe that it falls to the Presidency of Parliament to raise awareness of this problem and ensure that these killings cease. I appeal to you, Mr President, to arrange for letters to be sent from the Presidency to Mr Pastrana and to the European institutions to draw attention to the situation and to try to prevent even worse abuses.
Thank you very much Mrs Gonzlez lvarez. As you often play a leading role in defending human rights in America and elsewhere, I am sure you will understand that Parliament is always very concerned about problems of this nature.
I will pass the matter to the Presidency, so that it can approach the government of Colombia and efforts can be made to tackle and resolve this very serious matter.
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0127/2001) by Mr Katiforis, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the annual assessment of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes.
Mr President, the stability and convergence programmes being evaluated today by Parliament constitute the second updates of the original programmes first presented in 1999 by the 14 Member States, with the exception of Greece, which submitted its first programme this year.
Allow me to start with Greece' s programme, which addresses circumstances with which, as is to be expected, I am perfectly familiar. The programmes form part of the control and discipline mechanism of the stability agreement, an agreement on budgetary prudence, the two main objectives of which are to ensure that the budgetary deficit does not exceed 3% each year and, secondly, to achieve a balance or surplus over the period of a full economic cycle. If anyone had said back in 1993 that Greece would achieve these objectives in just 7 years, they would have been laughed at. Greece' s middle name was inflation - 13% in 1993 - and deficit - over 14% of GDP in 1993. It was the example to be eschewed in the European Union. Few believed that it would be able to resolve these problems. Yet, by the end of 2001, Greece - and the Council agrees with this - is expected, instead of a deficit, to have a surplus of half a percentage point of GDP, rising to 1.5% in 2002 and 2% in 2003. Also, instead of 13%, inflation is expected to be a mere 2.3%. I appreciate your allowing me to dwell on these figures a little because Greece' s espousal of the culture of price stability and budgetary stability was perhaps the jewel in the crown of this policy throughout Europe.
The spectacular turnround by this Member State, which succeeded in meeting the Maastricht criteria, is a typical example of the general climate of monetary and budgetary stability which has prevailed in Europe thanks to everyone' s efforts to support the single currency. The motion put to the House by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs acknowledges and commends the achievement of budgetary discipline and price stability. It points out that inflation was slightly above the ceiling set by the European Central Bank as the result of outside influences (oil prices, depreciation in the euro against the dollar), rather than internal economic weaknesses. It also points out that a balanced budgetary position, and hence monetary stability, can only be achieved in the medium-term on the basis of a robust European economy centred on a high rate of growth in production.
The average rate of growth was 3.3% in 2000 with Austria at 3.5%, Finland at 5.2%, Greece at 4.1%, Ireland at an astounding 10.7%, Luxembourg at 8.3%, the Netherlands at 4.5%, Portugal at exactly the European average of 3.3%, Spain at 4% and Sweden at 3.9%. Unfortunately, these rates of growth are unlikely to continue. High oil prices, high interest rates and the slowdown in the American economy have caused initial forecasts to be revised downwards to between 2.4% and 2.8%. So we cannot expect the same level of comfort or budgetary surpluses this year as we enjoyed in 2000, not that this means that there will be deficits. The main thing is to be well organised and to use public money to support growth, especially if we bear the long-term targets set in Lisbon in mind: full employment within ten years, an increase in the working population to 70%, an average rate of economic growth of 3%, reform of the social state and a European economy at the forefront of the knowledge-based economy.
The stability programmes presented indicate that the Member States are aware of these needs. They have used their surpluses to repay public debt, reduce taxes and increase public investment and, in the longer term, to stabilise the state pension system, which has also become an important consideration, with some resources being directed towards a reserve fund.
All these ways of exploiting strong fiscal positions are worthwhile and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs supports them, but not to the same degree. The Council considers the reduction of public debt as the main priority; it does not object to public investment, provided that it does not interfere with reducing debt, and it appears to oppose tax reductions. We, on the contrary, consider the achievement and the manner of use of primary surpluses not as a matter of dogma but as a matter of political expediency, to be judged according to current conditions and the needs of economic management. In the current situation, characterised by the menace of a serious recession in the US economy, as well as the persistent need to raise the rate of growth in Europe, debt repayment as well as tax reductions seem to us of lesser importance than financing public investment, naturally in balanced budgets, not deficits, both for supporting flagging growth and for pushing forward those structural changes necessary for the transition to a modern, technologically pioneering, full employment economy in Europe. It should not be forgotten that the absorption of high rates of unemployment presupposes the consistent achievement of a 3% rate of growth, a target which cannot be said to have been met on a permanent basis in our economy.
Finally, I should like to address a request to the Commissioner, because the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is concerned about the Union' s continued failure to make available to the appropriate committee in Parliament the detailed technical evaluations of each programme and it reiterates its call for a more harmonised timetabling of submission of the programmes by the Member States in order to improve comparability, calling in this context for full and timely involvement of the European Parliament.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 3 May 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, even during the election campaign in the Basque region, ETA terrorists have been active in Spain. On 6 May, the President of the Popular Party in the region of Aragon, Manuel Gimnez Abad, was assassinated in Zaragoza, and on 11 May, a car bomb exploded in Madrid, injuring thirteen people. On my own personal behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament, I immediately expressed our deepest sympathy and our sincere condolences to the family of Mr Gimnez Abad. I have also assured the Spanish authorities of our support.
One thing at least emerges clearly from the results of the elections held in the Spanish Basque region: the Basque people, who turned out in force to cast their votes, have rejected violence. I can only hope, now, that this message will be heard by all the political powers.
I shall now ask you, please, to observe a minute' s silence.
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 10 May pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed.
As far as Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday are concerned, no amendments have been proposed.
With regard to topical and urgent subjects of major importance, two amendments have been proposed.
On Human Rights, it is proposed that the second sub-item, 'Guatemala' , should be replaced by a new sub-item, 'Human rights situation in Cameroon' . This amendment was tabled by the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance.
(Parliament gave its assent) Still on the subject of Thursday, 'Illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo' , it is proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left that this item should be replaced by a new item, 'Floods in France' .
Madam President, in voting as we did just now as a group on the Cameroon question, we were assuming that other groups would help us in raising Guatemala, the position of Rios Montt and the very serious human rights violations next month; we should also like to propose that this topic, major reports and the situation in Congo be dealt with next month, since we are directly involved as the EU and it appears that next month will be possible. In that case we can deal now with the serious situation regarding the floods in France. We therefore agree with the substitution proposal.
Mr van den Berg, I am happy to take note of what you have said but, as you know, it is the Conference of Presidents who will be examining the situation that you describe. It seems to me, looking at the group chairmen, that there is a certain degree of consensus about what you have just proposed. I think, in fact, that we can assume that things will move in that direction.
As far as Wednesday 30 and Thursday 31 May 2001 are concerned, no amendments have been tabled.
Madam President, I have a point of order concerning the death penalty in the United States. I should like to ask you, if you have not already done so, to write to the President of the United States, Mr Bush, to ask that the death sentence against Tim McVeigh, the extreme right-wing terrorist bomber in Oklahoma, be commuted to life imprisonment.
This is on the basis of our longstanding opposition to the death penalty in the United States but in this particular case it is reinforced by the increasing evidence that the bombing was not carried out by a crazed lone bomber but as part of a conspiracy by the extreme right-wing Aryan Republic Army. To execute him at this stage would be to frustrate the search for truth and justice and serve the interests and ideology of the very people implicated in the crime.
Mr President, on a point of order. All our voting cards on these rows have been removed. It may be a plot by the PPE-DE Group to win the next vote, but something has gone wrong.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy met in the Chamber last night. I am sure that the voting cards will now be returned.
Mr President, I was present yesterday. I spoke in the plenary sitting, yet my name is not on the attendance register.
The next item is the report (A5-0165/2001) by Mr von Wogau, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission's recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community in 2001 [COM(2001) 224 - C5-0169/2001 - 2001/2081(COS)].
. (DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the first of January 2002 will mark the start of a momentous chapter in the history of European integration, when twelve sovereign states exchange their national currencies for a common European currency. From that moment on, the people of those twelve Member States will use the same notes and the same coins.
It seems appropriate to find a term to describe this new stage in the integration of national economies, a stage which is characterised by a common market and a common currency and which is surely unique in the economic history of the world. We propose the use of the term 'European home market' as a synonym for Euroland or the euro zone. This European home market already has a common monetary policy. Since European economic and monetary union came into being on 1 January 1999, this policy has been in the hands of the European Central Bank. Today, however, we are faced with the challenge of formulating appropriate common economic policies for the European home market.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs agreed by a clear majority that these economic policies should be based on the principle of a socially committed market economy. The main instrument for the coordination of economic policies at European level is the procedure laid down in the Treaty for establishing the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. The European Parliament has hitherto played a subordinate role in this procedure. I therefore believe it is absolutely essential to provide for a greater degree of participation by the European Parliament in future.
Another flaw in the procedure is its lack of flexibility. Recommendations are made on the basis of predicted economic trends. If, however, current economic data diverge from the forecast values, these recommendations lose some of their validity. The Member States must therefore be given some leeway to respond quickly to unexpected changes in economic indicators. The Guidelines are not legally binding, but it is certainly accurate to speak of the political binding force of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines.
Although there is no disputing that defects must be corrected in everyone' s interest, a certain margin of discretion should exist here too. I believe there is a need, for example, when assessing a Member State' s economic policies, to consider the extent to which particular trends in that country will affect the euro zone as a whole.
Economic growth in the European Union has slowed down since last year. The Commission has now revised its predicted growth rate of 3% and has lowered its expectations to 2.8%. Other observers expect even lower growth rates. On the basis of these forecasts, we consider a figure of between 2 and 2.5% for this year to be entirely realistic. In view of the general slowdown in the world economy, I believe it is crucial that the European Union should look to its own strengths. How profoundly the bleak global economic climate will affect us is largely in our own hands. Particularly in view of developments in the United States and Japan, responsibility for the world economy falls on the European Union, and we must shoulder that responsibility.
What is the present state of play in the European Union? As far as inflation is concerned, current forecasts indicate that prices are set to rise by more than 2% in two consecutive years, thereby exceeding the bounds of price stability as defined by the European Central Bank itself. External factors, however, such as the increase in oil prices, are playing an important part in this development.
In this difficult environment, the European Central Bank is doing an excellent job. But it must continue to do everything in its power to avoid squandering the reserves of trust that have been vested in it. That is why we welcome its steady-handed policy, which we encourage it to keep pursuing. At this point, however, I must cast doubt on the consistency of last week' s interest-rate cut with this approach.
In the domain of budgetary policy, most Member States have managed in the course of the past year to achieve the balanced budget prescribed in the Stability and Growth Pact. This, however, has been done with the aid of the proceeds from the sale of licences for the operation of universal mobile telecommunications systems (UMTS) as well as low interest rates and the increased tax revenue generated by accelerated economic growth. Some of the Member States, however, have not capitalised sufficiently on these favourable economic conditions to reduce their public deficits and their national debt.
In view of the changes in the ageing pattern of the European population and the strain these are likely to put on the pension system, it is crucial that sufficient financial room for manoeuvre be created. Full use must be made, for example, of the potential for spending cuts in every area. This should not undermine the role of public investment, but such investment must be made judiciously in pursuit of defined strategic aims and must not be made at the expense of priority private investment.
Looking to our own strengths also involves continuing the structural reforms of the Member States' capital products and labour markets. The Stockholm summit failed to reach agreement on a firm timetable for the liberalisation of the European gas and electricity markets. I very much regret that. Nevertheless, we should make every effort to secure the liberalisation of the remaining state monopolies. This is essential if we are to achieve our avowed aim of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world by the year 2010.
At the same time, it is imperative to push ahead with the completion of the internal market. I need cite only two major examples in this context: firstly, agreement must be reached at long last on the Community patent; secondly, Community rules on public procurement should be applied to defence procurement too, wherever their application is warranted.
Particularly at a time when the European Union is taking steps to establish a common defence policy, the ring-fencing of national defence markets is inefficient, anachronistic and quite simply too expensive.
Madam President, you will be aware that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is currently meeting in our Brussels building. You may not be aware that there are two representatives of the Burmese military junta taking part in that conference. As you know, the European Union has a common position, supported by this House, not to grant visas to members of the Burmese military junta. Yet here they are in our own building.
I understand that the Council has waived the ban for this conference, as it felt that this was necessary in view of its obligations to the United Nations. If so, may I call on you, Madam President, to ask the Council or Mr Solana to issue a statement making it absolutely clear that this was an exception and that the visa ban and the common position are still in place.
Thank you, Mr Corbett. I will indeed discuss this matter with Mr Solana. I also assume, of course, that Mrs Lindh has listened to you very carefully and that she has taken note of what you said. I do not know whether she wishes to reply. Not at this moment, it would seem. But we heard what you said Mr Corbett, and I, for my part, will take the appropriate steps.
Madam President, on a point of order. I wish to draw attention to some other rather unwelcome visitors on our premises. Yesterday there was a disgraceful Communist demonstration in the courtyard of the Tower. This is very intimidatory, as far as Members are concerned; it is an intrusion on our parliamentary premises. Could you look into the circumstances of this: where are the limits of this Parliament and what rights do we have to exclude such people from our premises?
I will give the floor to Mrs Banotti at once because I think she wishes to reply to your question, for which I thank her.
Madam President, you will be aware that I raised the issue at the Bureau last week about a grossly intimidatory and intrusive demonstration in front of the Parliament in Brussels, so I was equally surprised yesterday to see exactly the same thing happening again.
Apparently, the courtyard of the Parliament is a public space. It is under the control of the gendarmerie here in Strasbourg and apparently there has been some breakdown in communications. They had not informed Parliament that this demonstration was going to take place yesterday. I agree with Mr Van Orden. Everybody is entitled to their democratic point of view, but certainly it was intimidatory to both Members and guests, hundreds of whom were trying to get into to Parliament at the same time. So I very much hope that the administration in Strasbourg will ensure that we do not have to go through that again.
I make no comment on the issue that was being raised, but this is the second time that access to Parliament has been impeded by the same demonstrators.
Madam President, on Monday evening, after your statement about the Berlusconi business in Spain, I asked whether you could possibly let us have all the documents you had received from the Spanish political and judicial authorities. You replied that yes, of course, you would see to it immediately. It is now Wednesday morning and I have still not received these documents.
That is quite unacceptable, Mr Caudron. I shall check what has happened at once. I asked the departments concerned twice and they assured me that these documents had been transmitted to all the Members of this Parliament. Believe me, I will look into this matter.
Madam President, I had the same observation as Mr Corbett. We also received notification that a high-ranking Burmese delegation is in Brussels. It is the official policy of the European Union not to admit any government representatives from Burma because of the shameful regime in that country. No less a person than Aung San Suu Kyi, who received the Sakharov Prize here, is still in detention. I consider it an absolute disgrace that these people are able to come here and speak in our very own parliament. I should like to join wholeheartedly with Mr Corbett in asking for immediate action to be taken.
Madam President, some more points on the Berlusconi affair. First a positive point. I must tell you, and Mr Caudron, that the documentation you promised us was definitely sent by the secretarial services. We received it yesterday - admittedly after 9 p.m. by e-mail in all languages. This leads me to believe that a number of honourable Members have not yet checked their e-mail today.
But now a second matter, Madam President. I have in front of me a telegram you sent to Mr Berlusconi, leader of Forza Italia. You congratulate Mr Berlusconi, admittedly on a personal basis. But I must say that I am amazed at the very warm way in which you express the wish that he will give Italy a new impetus with his election manifesto. I must remind you, Madam President, and stress that Mr Berlusconi's election victory does not place him above suspicion in regard to the allegations of corruption and abuse of power. I should like to state clearly here that the origin of his fortune is surrounded by a lack of clarity. Moreover, his monopolistic hold on the media constitutes a danger for Italian democracy, Madam President. As you know, Berlusconi controls a large part of the Italian press. I find this unacceptable. In fact, I would hope that the Commission will quickly institute an investigation into this violation of European competition law.
Madam President, I had hoped that despite the warm words you have sent to Mr Berlusconi, you would lead the way in this campaign to make it clear that what is currently happening in Italy is really not really kosher.
Mr Staes, thank you for informing me that you received the documents last night. I can only ask Mr Caudron to check his mail.
As for the telegram I sent Mr Berlusconi, I am sure you took note of the fact that I had made it quite clear that I was congratulating him on a personal basis. Obviously I was not speaking on behalf of the European Parliament in this congratulatory telegram, but simply expressing myself on a personal basis.
Madam President, there is a limit to the patience even of calm, restrained people like myself. We have witnessed a number of personal attacks on the leader of a political grouping, attacks based on information given in newspaper articles, none of which has been proved to be true. We are an institution: well then, an institution demands that respect be shown for all its members, and I would argue that this has not been the case over the last two months. The Italian people have made a clear, indisputable choice: we are in the presence of a Head of State. Therefore, the Members are all free to have their own - quite legitimate - views, but in meetings of our institution would they kindly keep them to themselves!
Madam President, a few hours ago, a Basque journalist, Mr Landaburu, was the victim of an attack. Mr Landaburu is well known for his professional work, his commitment to democracy and his opposition to Francoism. Fortunately, he escaped with his life. Nonetheless, this is a disturbing incident, coming as it does just a few days after elections in the Basque country. Without going into the results, the 80% turnout alone is worth mentioning. It represents a very positive development.
Madam President, yesterday, as we all know, there was a minor incident here during the debate on the situation of Turkish prisoners. In this connection it was stated, by the Vice-President in the Chair amongst others, that the Committee on Budgets was blocking the posts which were necessary to strengthen the security service. As the rapporteur responsible, I should like to state here that the posts requested were entered in the reserve with the agreement of the Bureau and that the Bureau has not yet made any request for these proposed posts to be taken out of the reserve. I firmly refute, therefore, the accusation that the Budgets Committee is blocking the posts necessary to improve security in Parliament. In so doing I would point out that the Bureau is required to request the relevant transfer of appropriations.
Mr Ferber, your point has very little, if anything, to do with the Minutes. That said, you raise the issue of yesterday' s incident. I can assure you that we take such incidents quite as seriously as they deserve. The Quaestors have already met and looked into the matter. I would also point out that the group involved was brought in by a Member, and neither he nor his assistant seemed to be around any more, so it was a kind of orphan group, no longer accompanied. That is one thing.
As regards the Bureau, Mr Ferber, thank you for raising that, we are currently working to adopt some very strict security measures, which I believe many Members want in the interest of our institution, because what happened yesterday is one thing, but other things could happen. Everyone is well aware of that. Of course, the Bureau is seeking the cooperation of the Committee on Budgets. We hope we will be successful as soon as possible.
Madam President, yesterday's incident has nothing to do with the fact that certain posts have not yet been approved. The two are wholly unconnected.
Firstly, a mistake was made at the checkpoint here on the way into the Chamber. The people are there. We do not need any new posts. Secondly, people are saying that the security guards posted at the entrances were responsible. That does not have anything to do with the posts either. What is important is that we improve security. Mr Ferber is right there. However, there is no direct link to yesterday's incident.
Absolutely, Mr Schmid, that is what I said myself: yesterday' s incident is one thing, the general security problem is another.
Madam President, I also wish to address item 23 in yesterday's Minutes concerning security.
We are all very grateful for the explanation that you have given about how the matter occurred yesterday, and it is very important that the House recognises the point that you also made, namely that this is a subject that the Bureau is also currently discussing. It is an extremely serious and vitally important point, because security in this House is not good enough.
What happened yesterday, however, is slightly different, because it calls into question the status and the responsibility of individual Members as to whom they invite into this House.
We have had a very lively discussion in our own political group this morning on this matter, and I am going to ask you, Madam President, to convene a special meeting of the Bureau so that all these matters can be discussed. I recognise that it is already on the agenda of the Bureau and is an on-going discussion, but it is so important that we have time to consider the issue properly that I believe we need a special meeting of the Bureau and I hereby request you to convene that meeting.
Thank you Mr Provan. We will see if that is possible tomorrow morning. I am joking. That being so, on 30 May, we will look at the whole situation in all its aspects. I do not think Mr Provan has understood my invitation.
Madam President, first I want to thank Mr Ferber and Mr Schmid for not using this incident to score political points. I am also very sorry such an incident could have occurred. I immediately found out how these people were able to get into the Chamber. A Member in my group has apparently been mislead in this matter. I can vouch for my colleague' s good faith. He obviously never wanted anything like this to happen.
asked to be received because the mother of one of them is one of the hunger strikers in Turkey and is in a critical condition. My colleague agreed to meet them in his office and it was when he was saying goodbye to the delegation that he failed to keep an eye on them and these three people were able to get inside the Chamber.
My colleague - whom I informed immediately - has sent me a letter this morning explaining the facts. He expresses his dismay and apologises to the House. I shall be handing this letter to you, Madam President. I want to say that I am all the more distressed about this incident because I do not think it serves the cause of the men and women who are dying every day in Turkey at this moment, and I believe that is the real tragedy.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 17 May 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, on 24 May, Mr Santiago Oleaga, financial director of the Basque daily newspaper, El Diario Vasco, was killed in San Sebastian by seven bullet shots to the back.
The day before, terrorists had again attempted to kill a security officer at the University of the Basque Country, by placing a bomb underneath his car, which fortunately failed to go off.
When the news of Mr Oleaga' s death was announced, I immediately expressed, on my own behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament, my sincere condolences and our support to the victim's family and colleagues.
Unfortunately, ETA has once again revealed its true colours, namely its preference for blind terrorism that rejects democracy and scorns all types of freedom, including one of the most fundamental, which is freedom of expression.
I would ask you to observe a minute' s silence.
The next item is the order of business. The draft agenda has been distributed and the following changes have been proposed or made, pursuant to Rule 111 of the Rules of Procedure.
First of all, I have two pieces of information to give to you. Mr Busquin will present the Commission statement on the specific programme implementing the Framework Programmes 2000-2006 of the European Community, on the one hand, for research, technological development and demonstration activities, and of the European Atomic Energy Community, on the other hand, for research and training activities.
I would also inform you that the report by Mr Hans-Peter Mayer, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, has been withdrawn from the agenda, because it has not yet been adopted by the competent committee.
With regard to the joint debate on environment policy, the Council has informed us that the Swedish Minister for the Environment, Mr Larsson, wishes to attend the debate on the report by Mrs Hulthn. Therefore, with the agreement of the political groups, the joint debate will be brought forward in the agenda and will be dealt with before the report by Mrs Myller, also on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on a Community Environment Action Programme.
Lastly, I would like to inform you that the deadline for tabling requests for separate, split and roll-call votes has been brought forward to 4 p.m. today, which has also been done at the request of the political groups and with their full agreement.
Madam President, in the last few days an agreement has been reached on a European bill to combat paedophilia. I would point out that this agreement comes a little late considering the thousands of signatures we have had the honour of presenting to you on this issue, and considering the growth of this phenomenon which has struck down so many thousands of children, as it did recently in Italy.
We want quicker justice and tougher legislation. In fact, all too frequently, economic interests and political connivance lie behind this filthy crime, which marks the lives of thousands of children forever.
We want Parliament to urge the Commission and the Council of Ministers to mount a great campaign against paedophilia, including regulating the use of the Internet, too often the vehicle of paedophiles. Children all over the world, but especially in Europe, are calling on Parliament to make its voice heard. We cannot rely solely on late, restrictive documents. We must start to take effective action.
Madam President, I wanted to bring up the issue of a very important meeting which took place yesterday with Justice and Home Affairs ministers, where agreement was made in relation to people' s privacy and their right to privacy, their fundamental rights in access to telecommunications.
This is what is called ENFOPOL 29. It has never been discussed in this Parliament. There was a discussion on ENFOPOL 98 about re-writing international user requirements, but this is very different. It is interpreting the existing requirements and how they will be used within the EU. It is completely unacceptable that far-reaching decisions have been taken by the Council of Justice and Home Affairs ministers when there has been no debate in this Parliament on the subject. These decisions will affect us all and will affect everybody outside this Parliament: people will not have the right to privacy, and this is an issue that should be raised right across the board. It is a fundamental rights issue.
Madam President, I should like to address the same issue. The bad thing about the renewal of these ENFOPOL plans is that they go much further than was planned three years ago. It will no longer only be traffic data and content data - that is the header of an e-mail and the content - that are monitored, but many, many more details down to credit card details, and IP-ports, which would enable everything on the computer to be monitored. In other words, there would be no part of the communication that was not monitored. That was not even mentioned in the documents before the Council. We have no way of getting hold of the information! It appears that, because of a formal error, the actual decision has not yet been taken. It can be taken at any time, however, and no further meeting is required for the purpose.
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0173/2001) by Mrs Hautala, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 76/207/EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions [COM(2000) 334 - C5-0369/2000 - 2000/0142(COD)]
Mr President, the European Union already has a quarter of a century of legislative tradition which obliges it to take equality between women and men in working life seriously. The directive under discussion today took on its original form as early as 1976. We can state that in over a quarter of a century our societies have developed considerably in many respects and it is time to revise our view of equality between women and men at work to meet the requirements of today. The Treaty of Amsterdam also obliges us to do so, as it lays down that equality between women and men must be broadly taken into account in all the work of the Community.
We are now facing entirely new challenges which we must tackle through legislation. In this directive the European Union presents for the first time actions binding on Member States to prevent sexual harassment which is prevalent in the workplace. In this respect, I can also state that research shows that one in two women in the European Union has suffered sexual harassment at work. It is quite clear that from time to time this can also affect men; men can also be the victims of sexual harassment but as a rule, however, still today the victims are mainly women. In this respect, the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities suggests that we go a little further than the Commission originally intended. The Committee would like the Member States to start preventive work to prevent sexual harassment and for employers to be obliged to create working conditions in which sexual harassment is unlikely. I have also emphasised the fact that this may improve the position of the employer, since if employers can show that they have initiated such preventive work, they will surely be in a stronger position should conflict arise.
Maternity protection also needs strengthening. I myself am from Finland and it is often thought that Finland is a model country in terms of equal opportunities. However, I can say that in our country too women around the age of thirty, for example, are having abortions more often than should be the case. Research carried out into the reasons behind this found that this may be due to there being so much competition in the workplace. Employers discriminate against women who are at an age where they are likely to have children. We would like to put a stop to this once and for all. This is sexual discrimination, which is banned.
This directive also gives the victims of sexual discrimination stronger legal protection and also requires that victims of sexual discrimination are still able to take legal action even once a working relationship has been terminated. Here they can receive support from an independent body, which this directive requires be set up.
I am sure that such independent bodies for equal opportunities already exist in most Member States but I would like to emphasise the importance of this issue when considering candidate countries. In another context the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities has focused considerable attention on the fact that issues concerning equality between women and men in candidate countries have not been as strongly emphasised in accession negotiations as they should have been. This can also be strengthened by creating sufficient institutions whose task, according to the law, is to ensure that equality is achieved and even promoted.
I would like to emphasise that social development has brought with it new types of equality issues. There was a great deal of discussion within the Committee on whether young men and fathers need stronger protection against sexual discrimination. I believe that we have reached a good compromise in including fathers and their rights in this directive. In my opinion, this is highly appropriate at a time when the equal opportunities discussion has largely moved towards looking at how men can take part in realising their family responsibilities. In this way, we will be able to head towards real equality.
Mr President, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs felt that, despite the progress that has been made in legislation, discrimination remains in pay and the labour market is still segmented, with salaries remaining low in the traditional sectors and tending to persist in services and in the so-called 'new economy' . Forty per cent of the growth in women' s employment is due to part-time and independent work, which receives minimal wages. Although this is an alternative to unemployment and may help reconcile work and family life, it nevertheless creates a new form of discrimination, which is not sufficiently described by the statistics. One example of this is the recruitment of over-qualified people for less high-powered jobs.
The Structural Funds must provide an incentive to the social partners to adopt agreements on equality. The Lisbon Council decisions, the broad employment guidelines for 2001, the Social Agenda and the new provisions of the Treaty all define the importance of increasing employment amongst women, in both quantitative and qualitative terms, not simply to comply with a law, but mainly for the sake of economic balance and to ensure that pensions are sustainable. What is important is to get the overall picture correct, even if we achieve this in a roundabout way.
The texts submitted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs propose new formulae for the concepts of positive action, of indirect discrimination, which victimises one or more individuals and of harassment as a phenomenon of domination and humiliation with or without direct sexual abuse. I would put it like this: we are opting for an approach that we consider to be more wide-ranging and more appropriate.
The members of this committee were unanimous in extending protection for maternity and paternity leave, for adoption and during pregnancy and, once again, we recommend, as Parliament has done, that Directive 92/85/EC be revised. The right to return to work laid down in Directive 76/207/EEC - and on this point we disagree with Mrs Hautala' s report - must enable women, in order to protect their job following maternity leave, to take up an equivalent position in the event that their job changes or becomes defunct.
Mr President, following on from the famous ruling by the European Court of Justice on 17 October 1975, it will soon be six years since we started to discuss the amendment of the 1976 Directive on equality as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions.
The Commission believed that it was doing the right thing by submitting a proposal to us in 1996 to amend that directive - a directive which at least had the great advantage of encouraging, in practical terms, equality between men and women in the workplace, in the areas concerned.
The amendment proposed in 1976 was intended solely to safeguard positive actions, which were put at risk by the 1975 judgement. As the rapporteur on that proposal, which failed to reassure me, I believed I was doing the right thing, this time, in waiting for another ruling by the Court of Justice in a similar case, the Marshall case. This ruling was issued in November 1997 and, this time, was not in favour of Mr Marshall, who felt that he was being discriminated against when a positive action was taken in favour of a female colleague. We looked at certain aspects again, to determine whether or not positive actions are, in fact, discriminatory, because there had been this U-turn on the part of the Court.
Even so, on the basis of the truism that we are all in the hands of God, whether at sea or in court, Parliament' s Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities was, at the time, willing to support me in asking the Commission to withdraw its proposal, which was considered to be inadequate, particularly because the Treaty of Amsterdam had since been signed. On 8 March 1999, therefore, we asked the Commission, here in Parliament, to withdraw its proposal and to submit to us a new one based on the ratified Treaty of Amsterdam. We explained this request, emphasising that under Articles 2, 3 and 141 of the Treaty of Amsterdam the right to equality between men and women is a fundamental right of a democratic society, which requires equality to be achieved by a series of real steps towards positive action.
Our message was clear: the proposed directive should contain an imperative legal mandate to take positive measures whenever they are necessary in order to achieve equality between men and women and to remedy the under-representation of women in the decision-making process.
The Commission braced itself for the task. It is already coming up to a year since it submitted a proposal to us to amend the 1976 Directive. Personally, I should have preferred the Commission to present us with an entirely new version, rather than piecemeal amendments here and there, because the Commission' s text gave rise to almost 200 amendments by the rapporteur and the various committees involved, and these were often drawn up without reference to the basic text, and with the intention, albeit worthy, of trying in that directive to reinvent the entire policy on equality in a number of other fields covered by other directives. One might rightly regard these other directives as being in need of improvement, but this amendment has nothing to do with those directives.
This did not make my task, as the previous rapporteur and as the notional rapporteur, for my group this time, any easier, because unfortunately I was not prepared to forget the message I referred to earlier in the context of my 1999 report. Personally, I take the view that the text proposed by the Committee on Women' s Rights has taken too much on board, and in some places, it is not very stable, in legal terms; it does not demonstrate the responsible attitude which the Council and the Commission are entitled to expect from their co-legislator, namely Parliament.
I have tried to make people see reason, but I have been only partially successful. In particular I regret those amendments, which disregard Article 141 of the Treaty. I regret the amendments that introduce so-called definitions. I regret the muddle over maternity protection, and the confusion between maternity leave for women and parental...
Mr President, first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Hautala, for her thorough work and for her willingness to take into account all the contributions and suggestions that all the political groups made on such a delicate matter. The last speech showed how intense the discussion within the Committee on Women' s Rights was, because it is quite true that the 1976 directive played a remarkable role, but 25 years have passed and both social behaviour and the role of women have changed. Behind us we have numerous decisions of the Court of Justice but, most importantly, we have the Treaty of Amsterdam which, from the legal standpoint, gives us the opportunity to consolidate and make more effective the legal instruments which, as we are quite aware, are instruments, but vital instruments for implementing active policies and for putting the principle of equal opportunities into practice, even as regards access to employment.
The temptation to try to use this amendment to the directive to tackle many of the problems facing women has been great - in this respect Mrs Lulling is right - but I believe that the result of our labours is, from a legal standpoint, absolutely consistent with the proposals and objectives of the draft amendment that the Commission presented to us. I believe the definitions of 'direct discrimination' and 'indirect discrimination' which we have taken from the Commission proposal and improved upon are such as to make the use of this instrument clear at a legal level. The inclusion of harassment and sexual harassment as elements of discrimination is, without a shadow of a doubt, equally clear, as is also the clarification that the right to maternity, like the right to paternity, cannot be used as an instrument for enforcing discrimination. The possibility of putting into practice positive actions like, indeed, the possibility given to us by Article 141(4) of the Treaty, is, I believe, an equally clear instrument, so that the directive - which I hope will be operational by the end of this year and will be an instrument at the service of all the Member States, all women, all organisations - may truly become one more instrument added to those that the European Union has for all these years placed at the service of so many Member States.
Somebody raised the point that the European Union might interfere more than it should do under the principle of subsidiarity. Well, in my opinion, not even this could ever be used as an excuse by anybody, because the legal instruments that can be adopted are specified here and in some cases there are obligations associated with them and in others opportunities, depending on the laws of the Member States. But I believe and hope that, today, the House will, by a large majority, approve Mrs Hautala' s proposal, which has the consensus of the overwhelming majority of the Committee on Women' s Rights, because I feel that this, too, will be a step forwards in making one of the basic principles of our Community - the principle of equal opportunities - become a reality.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament which was adjourned on Thursday, 31 May 2001.
The Minutes of Thursday 31 May 2001 have been distributed.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I have a comment about the Minutes. In the Annex to the Minutes, in the Texts Adopted, on the Mndes de Vigo report - I am just looking for my papers and of course cannot find anything now - it states at one point that a European constitution should be drafted. This goes back to a proposal for an amendment by Mr Brok. When I checked with Mr Brok, he confirmed that he did not choose this phrase in his proposal for an amendment. I would therefore request that the proposals for amendments be used to check again whether this theme has now been included correctly in the final Mndes De Vigo document in all the languages, as we obviously want to avoid any misinterpretations here.
The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
I have no requests for amendments to Monday or Tuesday's agendas.
I have received a request from the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats to postpone to a later part-session the joint debate on the annual report by Mr Wuori, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on human rights in the world in 2000 and the European Union Human Rights Policy, and the Council statement on the European Union strategy in the international organisations.
A representative from the Group of the European People' s Party will be taking the floor, so that Parliament can discuss the outcome of the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Nice, in the presence of the Council and as part of the debate on the preparations for the Gothenburg Summit.
Madam President, we found it very difficult indeed to put forward this proposal, especially as we are always keen to cooperate, also with Mrs Hautala, as far as politically possible. However, we wanted to have enough time for the debate on Gothenburg, which is why we have proposed that the Wuori report be postponed until the mini-session. This is therefore not a substantive objection; it is simply a matter of having more time to prepare the important Summit in Gothenburg.
Madam President, I would like to appeal to my colleague Mr Poettering and also everyone else who planned the successful postponement of the reading of my colleague Mr Wuori' s human rights report. When this Parliament addresses human rights this is always done at a very theoretical level but when something really could be achieved people want to delay it.
I would request that Mr Poettering consider that my colleague Mr Wuori' s report not be removed from the agenda and that a short discussion be held nevertheless on the Irish referendum in addition to the discussion we are going to have on the Gothenburg Summit. It would be a pity if the undeniable high point of the week, my colleague Mr Wuori' s report, were now suddenly to be taken away. None of you wanted this last week. We should perhaps have realised that the Irish referendum would arouse discussion but we did not.
Madam President, my group is prepared to support the postponement of this debate on human rights provided that it takes place during the July part-session and is not postponed indefinitely. This is because we believe that the debate on this report is very important, but we also believe that there are other events, such as the case of Ireland, which deserve our attention on the eve of the Gothenburg Summit.
I will add one piece of information: if I am not mistaken, the Belgian Prime Minister, Mr Verhofstadt, will appear before this Parliament during the next part-session. Mr Verhosfstadt, as a senator in the Kingdom of Belgium, was the rapporteur for the committee which studied Belgium' s responsibilities in the case of Rwanda. An historic judgment is currently being drafted in Brussels which will define the universal dimension of genocide, which I believe does honour to Belgium and the European Union. I believe that it is very important that we listen to the Belgian Prime Minister on such a crucial issue.
Thank you, Mr Barn Crespo. I believe that Mr Poettering agreed to include the report in the agenda of the July part-session.
Mr Poettering presented the request and Mrs Hautala has spoken against it. A speaker in favour of the request will now take the floor, since Mr Poettering tabled it. Mr Barn Crespo in its favour, as long as the debate is placed on July' s agenda. This means, then, that there are two speakers in favour of postponing the debate.
I must start with a regrettable announcement. You will have noticed that the attendance lists have not yet been posted at the entrance to the chamber. There are technical problems with the computer through which they are printed out, so, unfortunately, I have to ask you to register later - perhaps during the vote at noon today, for instance. There is no alternative, I am sorry to say.
(Heckling by Mr Ferber: "It' s all the Vice-President' s fault!" ) Mr Ferber, in such cases the blame is automatically assigned to the official - in this case Mr Rmer, who is here beside me!
Mr President, I would like to say that I was here yesterday. I arrived at Parliament at 6 p.m. yesterday but unfortunately did not sign the attendance register because I was busy.
Mr Sacrdeus, our services will find out how that is supposed to be handled.
Mr President, yesterday, on behalf of our group, I talked about capital punishment, and I also said that, in our view, there is a clash between Europe' s system of values and that which is currently being adhered to in America in this connection. I also stated that this is of major importance, especially in the light of Mr Bush' s visit to Europe this week. These two elements, the clash between the two value systems, and the position of President Bush and his visit to Europe this week, are not mentioned in the Minutes in this connection. I would like to see these included.
Mr President, I raised the matter of Question Time yesterday. The President, as you will see from the Minutes, replied that too few questions had been received for two Commissioners, whose names were therefore removed from the list of speakers for Question Time. I checked this out. Mr Kinnock received only one question, yet his name remains on the list. Mrs Schreyer took a question from me; she is not on the list, even though other Members, such as Mr Trakatellis, addressed questions to her. So something is very much amiss in this whole business. I should like you to look into this matter and provide me with some clear information tomorrow as to why Question Time was shortened.
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development. (DE) Mr President, a majority of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted for urgent procedure yesterday evening. By adopting the report yesterday evening, we have paved the way for the vote to be taken this week, provided that the House approves the motion for urgent procedure.
Proposal for a Council decision [COM(2001)81 - C5-0138/2001 - 2001/0045(CNS)] on further exceptional financial assistance to Kosovo.
Mr President, the Commission and the Council have asked for urgent procedure. We need to respond without delay, so that the appropriate assistance can be provided quickly in Kosovo. The Committee voted on the report yesterday, and we can therefore commend this request for urgent procedure to the House.
Proposal for a Council decision [COM(2001)277 - C5-0231/2001 - 2001/0112 (CNS)] granting macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Madam President, I would like inform you and this House that two citizens of my country, from my region - Castilla y Len - have been held captive in Georgia since 30 November of last year.
Mr Jos Antonio Tremio Gmez and Mr Francisco Jess Rodrguez Cabal, who travelled to that country six months ago, have been held in an unknown location since then, and there has been no information from any source there. Madam President, I would ask you to take note of this serious problem, which affects these two European citizens and their families, so that you may urge the Georgian authorities to immediately locate and free these two Spaniards, who are being deprived of their main fundamental right; freedom.
Certainly, Mrs Redondo Jimnez. First, we will look into the matter closely and then we will, indeed, consider how we can help your compatriots.
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation of the European Council in Gothenburg on 15 and 16 June 2001.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, almost half a year ago, I addressed Parliament for the first time on the subject of the Swedish Presidency' s goals. Since then we have had an in-depth and constructive discussion on future issues for Europe, the three "E' s" of Enlargement, Employment, Environment, openness and reforms, crisis management and conflict prevention, the future, democracy, development and human rights. Unfortunately, I must express my regret that Parliament has postponed the debate which we were to have had today on human rights, which was an important priority for the Swedish Presidency.
The issues surrounding the future of Europe will naturally also come up at the European Council in Gothenburg. First, I would like to say something about enlargement - Europe' s historic undertaking and most important issue for the future. The credibility of the entire European Union rests on the completion of our work programme which, six months ago, was seen to be highly ambitious, by some even unrealistic. EU Common Positions have been adopted on all nine chapters which made up the Swedish Presidency' s road map, including several difficult issues such as the free movement of people, acquisition of property and, especially, the environment. We have been able to complete the chapter on the free movement of people with two applicant countries and on movement of capital with seven applicant countries. The environmental chapter has been completed with no fewer than four applicant countries. We can therefore talk about real breakthroughs in the negotiations. The whole internal market area has fallen into place. The four freedoms, fundamental to the EU, can now be implemented with a couple of countries.
We have also laid a sound foundation regarding central issues such as nuclear safety, food safety and land transport and completed chapters which were actually to be dealt with in the autumn according to our road map. We will be holding open negotiations in all areas with some of the countries which started negotiating last year. As such, we can confirm the principle of differentiation. Each applicant country is assessed on its own merits and controls the pace of the negotiations.
We held ministerial meetings with all the applicant countries on Monday and Tuesday. They were all very pleased with the progress achieved during the negotiations. At the same time, we could see clear concern among them following the referendum in Ireland. Naturally, I and many others are disappointed with the referendum result there, but it is therefore even more important that the work on ratifying the Treaty of Nice progresses, as it is the very foundation for the enlargement negotiations. It is also that much more important that the membership negotiations with the applicant countries are taken forward without any let up in the pace. The uncertainty which the referendum may have caused and spread to the applicant countries must be dealt with by our showing even more clearly that enlargement will continue.
The progress we have seen during negotiations with the applicant countries would not have been possible if these countries had not implemented major reforms and put a great deal of work into meeting our requirements. It could make and of course is making pro-EU governments even more open to populist attack if there is a sense that enlargement is about to stall.
I believe that we must draw three conclusions following Nice. Firstly, the Gothenburg Summit must give a clear signal that enlargement will move forward. Secondly, we all have a responsibility to send a clear message that the Treaty of Nice will be implemented and ratification will continue in other countries. Thirdly, we must all become better at making our citizens feel more connected with the EU. On this matter, we can also use the debate on the future of Europe to open up a general debate on Europe, and we all have a responsibility in this respect.
We discussed the issues for the future here in Parliament most recently on 30 May. I would just like to add that the report for Gothenburg describes all the initiatives from Member States, applicant countries and institutions, especially Parliament' s resolution of 31 May. With regard to the continuing process, we can also state that many people are in favour of a convention in the preparatory stage. Many are also of the opinion that such a convention should be combined with other measures. This is also Sweden' s view, and we should like to be able to highlight this direction in Gothenburg. However, the exact make-up must be dealt with in Laeken.
In Gothenburg, we will also be addressing the Swedish Presidency' s third "E" : Environment. We will be taking some important steps to adapt EU policy to ecological development, sustainable in the long term, by establishing concrete targets, concrete measures and an effective monitoring process. In this respect, we will be building further on the Commission report which proposes, for example, measures against climate change and health risks and for responsible handling of natural resources and improved transport systems.
The EU is, in fact, the only global power able to push forward environmental issues and sustainable development globally. It is therefore also natural for climate issues and the Kyoto Protocol to be brought up at the Summit with the US president in Gothenburg, which we will be doing. At the same time, we know that if we are to be able to play a leading global role, we also have to put our own house in order.
This is also true of other international issues on which the EU is now developing its instruments and becoming increasingly coordinated in its action in order to be able to exert influence.
As such, the common European security and defence policy, ESDP, is one of our most important processes. Conflict prevention, civil crisis management and military crisis management are all brought together into a single unit. We are adding to the positive development of the military area by also expanding civil crisis management with police, in the judicial area and with civil administration. We have also developed work on preventing armed conflict. The Gothenburg Summit will receive a report on progress within the ESDP and a European programme for conflict prevention.
In this work, the UN is our most important partner. At a working lunch with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in May, we identified a number of priorities for cooperation in conflict prevention and crisis management in which our growing military and civil capacity will constitute a major contribution to the UN. We are strengthening our cooperation in the field through joint fact finding missions and cooperation between special representatives. The Balkans, the Middle East and Africa are particular priorities. Naturally, we are also developing cooperation with NATO, which we have been able to see especially in the current crises in Macedonia and Southern Serbia.
In Gothenburg, we will also be discussing important foreign policy issues, including the Middle East where the EU has been highly active. Swedish Prime Minister Gran Persson has visited the region and High Representative Javier Solana has made a large number of consultation visits and is expected to present a road map for the EU' s continued involvement and work in the Middle East at the Gothenburg Summit.
We will be discussing the Western Balkans, where developments in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, FYROM, continue to cause concern. On the Presidency' s behalf and in cooperation with Mr Solana, we have been active in keeping the coalition government together, isolating extremists, keeping the reform process for improving the status and rights of minorities going and continuing rapprochement with the EU. However, as we all know, the situation remains critical.
In Southern Serbia, developments are more positive. This is also an example of the way we can deal with conflicts through close cooperation between the EU and NATO.
We are approaching the end of our Presidency, but we have a great deal left to do and hope to take decisive steps at the Gothenburg Summit - on enlargement, jobs and the environment and the EU' s global role. We intend to be proactive and know that, in all the issues which we discuss, we will need the active support of Parliament.
Madam President, Minister for Foreign Affairs, ladies and gentlemen, tomorrow, the European Council will meet in Gothenburg. There are many items on the agenda but I intend to focus on just two of them: enlargement and sustainable development. However, another very important subject will also be discussed in Gothenburg: the outcome of the referendum held by the Republic of Ireland on the ratification of the Nice Treaty.
Two days ago, the General Affairs Council discussed this matter and the 14 Member States adopted a statement. I would like to make a few brief remarks on the subject. While not wishing in any way to interfere in the sovereign decisions of the Irish people, I am personally deeply saddened by the outcome of the referendum. However, the enlargement process must not be held up. As I will say again in a few minute's time, it is a historical and political necessity. The Commission will therefore continue to do its full duty to achieve this goal. Nevertheless, there is a political lesson to be learned.
Mr President, I would like to return to a matter which I am recorded as having raised in yesterday's minutes. Question Time to the Commission yesterday was truncated to a single hour, during which only five questions were answered. One of the most important aspects of the structure of the Union is the real accountability of Commissioners before this Parliament, which must relate to questions of relative detail that can be raised at Question Time, not just to issues of general policy.
It will be disastrous for the Union if we carry on this practice of truncating Question Time and having very few questions dealt with properly. One possibility suggested to me is that we might at least contemplate having a weekly Question Time in Brussels, as well as in Strasbourg, so as to provide for thorough questioning of the Commission on points which our constituents wish us to raise with them.
I am glad to see Mr Provan here today, because this kind of question falls within his remit as a Member of Parliament's Bureau. I put it to Members that it is vital that we question the Commission effectively. We are not doing this at the moment.
We are taking note of your comment and it will be duly considered.
Mr Andrews has the floor for a point of order.
Mr President, I refer to an administrative change that has been made in Parliament, which comes to me as news. Apparently, a contract has been signed by a new travel agency to replace Wagonlit. Since I came to this House in 1984, Wagonlit has provided an excellent service. Now we have a new travel agency coming in to takeover, maybe to save the Community a few pounds.
Travel for Members of this House is difficult enough without bringing in new agencies, without consulting Members. Some of the best travel agents who have served the Members of this House are going to leave. There should be more consultation when administrative changes of this kind are made. I think it is not a Parliament decision but a Commission decision. It is yet another undermining of the services to which Members are entitled. I hope the President will inform us of the reasons for the allocation of these contracts and the savings made. I have absolutely no interest other than the convenience of Members.
We are taking note of your concern and the Bureau of Parliament will consider the matter.
Mr Fitzsimons has the floor for a point of order.
Mr President, I wish to speak briefly on another point of order in relation to the Minutes. Much of the debate here yesterday focused on the Irish people's decision in relation to the Nice Treaty. I merely wish to say on this point of order that the Irish people took a democratic decision that we all accept. The Irish people believe in the European Union and in enlargement, and will deal with these issues in its own time and in its own way.
My real point of order is this: I strongly deplore the fact that, while Mr Le Pen was speaking in this Chamber, the French National Front waved the Irish flag beside him. I can assure the Members of this House that in doing so, the French National Front was abusing the Irish flag and everything it stands for.
Mr President, on a point of order. Like Mr Andrews, I, too, feel a great deal of concern at the way this matter of the travel office has been handled. I am not sure that the administration has actually raised it with the College of Quaestors, which would be the correct body to refer the matter to. It is really for them to look after Members' interests.
As far as Mr MacCormick is concerned, I am glad to see Mr Corbett sitting here because it is the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that is now looking at this matter, after the Bureau decided to refer it to them. I think he has the matter well in hand.
Mr President, I would like to raise two different points. First of all, I would like to point out that, with regard to the very legitimate question about the lack of time for Question Time, we cannot reduce the length of the Strasbourg sessions and then worry about the lack of time we have in which to deal with problems and propose to finish things off by overloading the Brussels agenda.
The terms of the Treaty make it quite clear. The Brussels sessions are intended to complement the Strasbourg sessions and we cannot, therefore, make them more intense, when we are not fully using the time that we have at the part-sessions. This must be reiterated, otherwise we really do face the prospect of having sessions that are utterly disorganised.
Mr President, I have a second brief comment - completely unrelated to the first - which is to do with the Minutes that you approved with your customary diligence and your usual skill. I would simply like to say, and I think that this can be added, as I made this comment earlier, that I abstained from voting on the resolution on Gothenburg - I did not vote in favour.
Thank you, Mr Bourlanges. The correction that you have pointed out to us will be made.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 14 June 2001.
I would like to inform you that, with effect from today, 2 July 2001, Mr Holmes will no longer be a member of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities. He will now sit with the Non-attached Members.
I would also like to announce that, pursuant to Rule 7(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has carried out a verification of credentials regarding Mrs Olga Zrihen Zaari and Mr Miguel Mayol i Raynal. I therefore propose to confirm these mandates.
I note that Mr Holmes is leader of the UK Independence Party. I wonder whether that means that the UK Independence Party is now transferring in its entirety, or at least the two Members who are present here, to the other group.
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 28 June 2001.
Madam President, I am sorry that I keep on having to repeat myself on the subject of Wednesdays, but the same deplorable state of affairs still exists. As I see it, question time has again been deferred and shortened. Every time I protest, I am told that this is exceptional. The exception is now slowly becoming the norm because, by foolishly abolishing the Friday sittings, we have overloaded the Wednesday ones. I would therefore ask you to ensure that, independently of the Friday issue - which we cannot now resolve -Wednesdays come fully into their own again. In other words, a full one and a half hours should be set aside for question time, for the right to ask questions is a fundamental right of every parliamentarian.
Mr Posselt, I promise you that this will be the last time.
Madam President, I would like to inform you once again of the difficulties of travelling to Strasbourg from the countries where we live. This morning, there were only 18 seats in total on the flight from Milan Malpensa to Strasbourg, as a result of which Mrs Morgantini and other Members found that their seats had been double-booked, and she was unable to get a plane in time to be here before the beginning of the part-session, despite the fact that she had left Rome at 7.30 this morning. I would like to make this extreme inconvenience known. I realise that airlines have limits, but surely Air France could provide an aeroplane with more than 18 seats on the first day of the part-session, Madam President. This is an obstacle to the work of this House.
Thank you for pointing this out to me, Mrs Napoletano. As you know, we are doing all we can to improve the situation. In any case, I think that there have been some improvements. I hope that some of you have noticed this, but I am well aware that there is still much to be done and have, therefore, taken a careful note of what you have said.
Madam President, there were no flights at all from Amsterdam to Strasbourg this morning. The flight was once again cancelled. I have drawn your attention to this on several occasions in this House. The number of flights, which was originally three per day, has been cut down to two. We then assumed that those flights would probably continue to operate, but Air France has once again decided to cancel the flights altogether. I should like to draw your attention to this. We all had to fly via Paris, Brussels or Frankfurt again, which meant that we were late arriving here, although we were at the airport before 8 a.m.
European Council meeting of 15-16 June 2001 in Gteborg - Swedish presidency
the European Council report and Commission statement on the European Council meeting of 15 and 16 June 2001 in Gteborg and
the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council, summing up the Swedish presidency.
It is my pleasure to give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Persson.
Madam President, honourable Members of this important Assembly, allow me to begin first of all by thanking you for your constructive cooperation during the Swedish presidency. It is important for the European Union' s different institutions to support, inspire, criticise and cooperate with one another but never forget that we have a common mission to develop our Union.
The Swedish presidency' s objective was to proceed from important decisions to the implementation of those decisions. Our ambition was not to add new decisions but, rather, to implement decisions already taken. We wanted to concentrate on three areas, which I had the opportunity to talk about when I was in Parliament at the beginning of the presidency. These were enlargement of the Union and issues relating to employment and the environment. In addition, we wanted to develop the Union' s common foreign and security policy.
I make no claim to provide a comprehensive review of the Swedish presidency in my report. Instead, I would offer some reflections upon the last six months. We have worked incredibly hard with the Commission in order to press on with the enlargement negotiations. The objective of this work was to show that the timetable drawn up by the Commission for the enlargement negotiations was realistic. We can now see that, during the Swedish presidency, we did everything we intended to do, and a little more besides. The very ambitious timetable drawn up by the Commission proved to be realistic. This was the basis for the European Council in Gteborg when we said that, in our judgment, we should have completed negotiations with the best prepared countries before the end of 2002 and that we also anticipated the first of today' s candidate countries' participating, as Members of the European Union, in the elections to the European Parliament in 2004. We were given a clear signal concerning the enlargement we wanted to see. We were given this because the negotiating work had been successful. This does not, of course, mean that the enlargement process has been carried out, but an important step has been taken. What is required is continued concentration and continued support for the Commission' s work and for the forthcoming presidencies, but also an appreciation of the fact that many of the difficulties represented by the enlargement process are, in fact, to be found within the European Union as it stands and not in relations with the candidate countries. The most demanding task for us within the European Union is to work out common positions for the fifteen Member States. There is a further demanding task. Our friends and colleagues in the candidate countries have the task of implementing reforms in their countries of such a kind as will prepare them for membership of the European Union. We must not forget, however, that we ourselves have to conduct an internal debate within the Union which, from a political perspective, is probably as difficult as the reforms which our friends have to implement in the candidate countries.
We said in Gteborg that enlargement would be a fact by 2004. To cite the French President' s description of the project, it is an irrevocable process. At the same time, we also said that we must be realistic and appreciate that there are certain countries, such as Romania and Bulgaria, which need extra support in their preparations. We are not talking here about extra financial support, but about support in the work of negotiation.
When Sweden took over the presidency, it was also our ambition to develop the foreign and security policy. We did not, however, emphasise this so much in our presidency programme, even though we mentioned it. Instead, we adopted the strategy of taking action. I am convinced that what we have managed to achieve in terms of foreign policy will be something that develops during forthcoming presidencies, for such development is to the European Union' s advantage when it comes to external relations.
I am thinking, above all, of three important factors. Increasingly, practical foreign policy is linked, firstly, to values, democracy and human rights; secondly, to economic relations, especially trade; and, thirdly, to a just and progressive aid policy, to which, from our point of view, it will continue to be linked. This last consideration is something to which we devote too little time and attention. It is an undervalued factor in external relations. These three factors indicate a development parallel to that of the European Union. If we are then able to act in concert on the basis of our values, we can also exercise influence.
During the Swedish presidency, we have developed our relations with Russia. Not for a moment have we concealed our disapproval of the situation in, for example, Chechnya. Never have we concealed our views on the situation in Russia where the freedom of the media is concerned, but we have, at the same time, developed relations in order to create economic cooperation and a dialogue characterised by trust.
We have also said that Russia is not enough. Russia is just one important factor. In that part of Europe, it is also a question of developing relations with Ukraine, which is a large, strategically important country with a European identity and which must have the option of belonging to Europe. According to the Gteborg conclusions, Ukraine is a country which, together with Moldova, will, in future, be invited to participate in the European conference. In that way, the European Union is also developing a relationship specifically in terms of foreign policy.
During our presidency, we also met the American president for the first time in the group of Fifteen. The fifteen Member States took part in a dialogue directly with the American president, just as we had met the Russian president. In that context, there was naturally a great deal of talk about the Kyoto issue, about which we most certainly do not, of course, have the same views - a fact which there was no point at all in concealing. On the contrary, there is reason for conducting a very open and tough debate, because we believe that the United States is not complying with those obligations it had earlier sent signals it was prepared to stand by. I am pleased that the European Union remained completely united in its dialogue with the United States about Kyoto. That was incredibly important.
Relations with the United States are not just about Kyoto. They are also, of course, about the situations in the Balkans and the Middle East and other international issues on which we hold similar positions and have every reason to cooperate. During the Swedish presidency, the European Union' s active presence in the Middle East has also, of course, been emphasised. That is important. The Middle East is the European Union' s neighbour. If the crisis in the Middle East escalates further - and we can, of course, all see that there is a very great risk of this happening - it will also become our own crisis, which is something that must be prevented using every political means available. Where the Middle East is concerned, too, this has been an extraordinarily active period from the points of view of the presidency, the Commission and also Secretary-General/High Representative Javier Solana.
In this way, a list can be made of foreign policy activities. Think too of North and South Korea, where the peace process must continue and be brought to a conclusion. The European Union, too, might be able to play a role there in the right circumstances. A picture is emerging of a European Union which is becoming more and more active in the field of foreign policy because we stand for common values, common views and a common approach. When we act together, we exercise influence. That is the signal.
Enlargement, foreign policy and environmental issues - these issues were incredibly important to the Swedish presidency. The Commission and Commissioner Wallstrm provided us with a very good basis in the form of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme and, subsequently, the Commission' s report on sustainable development. In Gteborg, we were able to establish principles for dealing with environmental issues in the future. We were able to establish that these processes must now also be integrated into the Lisbon process. In that way, we were able to take a decisive step towards sustainable development in its three dimensions: economic, social and ecological. That was an extraordinarily sound foundation provided by the Commission and each successive presidency and Commission must now make that foundation more secure and give it ever more practical expression. Perhaps matters are not progressing quickly enough. It is my feeling that they never do when it comes to the issue of the environment. On the other hand, we have the processes. We have a direction in which to move, and the first necessary political decisions have been taken. I believe that the decision taken in Gteborg was an extraordinarily important one.
Obviously, we also discussed the economic issues in Gteborg. We dealt with a number of the decisions which had, as it were, been left over from the Stockholm Summit - European Single Sky, the issues surrounding patents, general economic development, the demographic issue and lasting pension systems. Also on the agenda were matters which do not, of course, give rise to such a very great deal of opposition within the European Union today but, rather, provide something of an impetus for working together on issues which we know will, in actual fact, be of crucial importance to people' s lives in our part of the world during the next 20-30 years.
We have also had occasion, during our presidency, to pilot through to the decision-making stage a proposal concerning transparency in the European Union and the accessibility of documents. Let me say that it would not have been possible to arrive at that decision but for the very active support of Parliament. This is an excellent example of how Parliament, together with the Council and also the Commission, can implement a change. I am obviously not completely satisfied. We could have gone further but, as in all political contexts, not everything is achieved. We obtained a compromise along the right lines. It made the European Union more open, but it was not the finished product. I should like to see the debate continue, but our citizens are nonetheless now better placed to keep track of the things we are doing in the Union and, on objective grounds, to examine these critically and present alternatives - on objective grounds, I say, precisely because the information is available.
During the Swedish presidency, we have also begun the debate on the future. It will dominate the Belgian presidency and will, when 2004 comes around, result in a major decision being taken. The guidelines from Nice have been assigned, that is to say what will mainly be found within the framework of the debate. Now, both you and I know that, in a debate on the future of the European Union, we shall not be satisfied with concentrating on the four issues we cited in Nice. Instead, there will be a broader debate. Let it be just such a broad debate. Let it be a debate on what the European Union is, in actual fact, aiming for and on what it wants to do, and let there then be a discussion on how this is to be achieved. We must not always begin with a discussion on building and developing the institutions and then eventually conclude with the political discussion on what it is we want. Turn the debate on its head: invite the people of Europe to take part, broaden the debate and do not set any limits to it. Progressively structure the debate as a proper Intergovernmental Conference aimed at making the European Union more rational and more powerful. Our ambition was to launch a broad debate, and that is something we have done.
As I said at the beginning, we in the Swedish presidency have taken great pains to cooperate with Parliament. I was doing some totting up yesterday and worked out that Swedish ministers have taken part in debates and discussions in this Assembly or in other constellations associated with Parliament on 86 occasions. It has been incredibly worthwhile for us, and it is something I want to thank you for.
I also want to say that we now believe we have obtained a breakthrough with the Members' Charter and can press for a solution to that issue. That is the way it looks following an initial decision. I am pleased that, when we talk about Parliament and relations between the presidency and Parliament, we can also say that we have received a great many good ideas and proposals from yourselves.
Finally, I want to thank all the officials in the Commission, in Parliament and in the Council who have supported us during the presidency. Naturally, I am also deeply grateful towards my own colleagues in the Swedish Cabinet Office and Ministries who have enabled us to say, as we draw the Swedish presidency to a close, that we have made some progress. In the course of our six months, we took a few steps in the direction we wanted to go. I now hope that the Belgian presidency will do some further work on these major issues. I intend to do what I can to help ensure that my colleague, Mr Verhofstadt, is given all the constructive support he needs, in exactly the same way as I, during the Swedish presidency, have had extraordinarily fine support from Mr Chirac and Mr Jospin, the French president and prime minister. This was an absolute precondition for the success of our presidency and I am deeply grateful for it.
Finally, I want to say that, as our various parliaments around Europe enter their summer recess, there is an issue which I think we have to take away with us, namely the issue which, in all likelihood, is to be a feature of the debate about the future: that of how we are to make the European Union more open and more results-oriented and of how it is to be brought closer to our citizens. How is this to happen? What is that development to look like? What is possible in an enlarged Union? The Union will grow. That is something we now know following this presidency. It will grow and become a large Union with perhaps a further five, ten or perhaps still more Member States both in this Parliament and in the European Council.
Thank you for your constructive cooperation. I look forward to a continued relationship with the European Parliament.
Madam President, Prime Minister, honourable Members of the European Parliament, I naturally want to begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity to come here and present the Commission' s assessment of the European Council meeting in Gteborg. This meeting too was, in the end, about issues of widely differing kinds. Two decisions merit particular attention because they will advance European integration and shape policy in the medium and long term. I therefore want to concentrate on these two decisions in my presentation in this chamber.
First of all, the European Council has given us a fixed timetable for the first round of enlargement. It should be possible for negotiations with those candidate countries that are ready to be completed at the end of next year. The new Member States will therefore be able to participate as fully fledged Members in the elections to the European Parliament in 2004.
Secondly, the European Council gave its support to a strategy for sustainable development. This strategy involves the European Union' s undertaking to take certain measures to ensure that it will be possible for prosperity in Europe and the rest of the world to be maintained in the long term too. Through the Lisbon process, the environment has ended up at the centre of our policy. These are important and practical decisions that the Commission welcomes.
Madam President, as we all know, Parliament will be in recess in August. Therefore, I would like to recall today that 8 August 2001 is the anniversary of a tragedy: the 45th anniversary of the terrible accident which took place in the Marcinelle mines. On 8 August 1956, 262 miners died in the most tragic accident in the workplace ever to take place in Europe: 262 miners from all over our continent. I am sure, Madam President, that you will want to take suitable measures to mark the anniversary of this tragic event, and I am also sure that the Belgian presidency, which has announced that its programme will include the creation of an equitable social Europe, will make every endeavour to ensure that this proposal establishes the conditions necessary to prevent a tragedy such as that of Marcinelle ever occurring in Europe again.
Madam President, I learned yesterday that the Bureau was to make a statement today about the memorandum being prepared by this House on enlargement. You have a great sensitivity for language, Madam President, and you are more aware than anyone that the choice we are about to make on language regulation is the key to a great many other decisions that will have to be taken. Can you assure us that in the future all elected members of this House will continue to have the right to express themselves in their own language, to listen to their fellow-MEPs in their own language and to write in their own language? That would be a great help in setting our minds at rest.
Mrs Thyssen, I have noted what you say. But having said that, I must explain to you that the Bureau will not be adopting the document you mentioned this evening. It will not be until September, when the groups have been able to study it in depth.
Madam President, I should like to draw your attention to the increasing and continuing problems faced by our drivers. I was told that this afternoon a lawyer' s letter was going to be delivered to the prefect of Alsace, to clarify the uncertainty over the problems between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the French Ministry of Transport, since at the moment, the logical consequence of the regulations is that the vehicles used for taxi transport in the other weeks would no longer be available for use this week. I believe that in the light of the fact that France is very keen on keeping the seat of Parliament here, it is very regrettable that these kinds of formalities should jeopardise our transport.
Yes, I can tell you that the Quaestors will be looking into this issue. I am looking at the few Quaestors who are present in the House and I can confirm that they will be examining this issue very closely.
The next item is the Council statement on the programme of the Belgian presidency.
I give the floor to Mr Verhofstadt, President-in-Office of the Council.
Madam President of the European Parliament, Mr President of the European Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great honour for me to present to you the new presidency' s work programme. Incidentally, Madam President, this is not the first time I have addressed the European Parliament, because in 1987, as Chair of the Budget Council, I presented the budget for 1988 to the European Parliament. Compared to today, it was prehistory in budgetary terms. There was no financial perspective and no Berlin ceiling, and the preparation of a European budget was, at the time, an entirely small-scale and often nocturnal activity.
May I first of all express my appreciation of the Swedish presidency. Sweden had set itself three priorities, as it happens the three e' s: employment, environment and enlargement, and significant progress has been made in each of those fields; fresh impetus has been given to the Lisbon process, a common strategy for sustainable development has been established and excellent work has been done for enlarging the Union.
However, there can be no doubt that the greatest step forward has been in the field of the common foreign and security policy. By way of example I am very pleased to be able to mention the meetings with Presidents Putin and Bush - where the Fifteen spoke with one voice - the prominent part played by Javier Solana in the Balkan conflict, and the joint European Union and United States action in the Middle East.
All evidence, Madam President, that the European Union is also recognised as a partner in its own right at international level: when the European Union speaks with one voice, people listen.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, despite the many bright spots in the past few months, dark clouds gathered on the European horizon. Following the Danish 'no' , the Treaty of Nice was rejected in a referendum in Ireland and it yet again became clear, if clarification were needed, that there is a crisis of identity in the European Union. There is a yawning gap between the individual citizen and the European institutions. It would be to display a supercilious, indeed arrogant, attitude and would therefore be a great mistake simply to ignore this. The fears, concerns and complaints of the ordinary citizen must definitely be taken seriously. His expectations must also be met. That is why there is in fact only one great challenge for the new presidency, namely to reconcile the individual citizen once more with Europe, with the European Union and with the European institutions. To reconcile the citizen once more with Europe, to give the peoples of Europe new belief and confidence in the European Union - that is our task.
For the European Union represents the only future for the peoples, states and nations of our old continent. Only as a Union are we a player on the world stage, a power capable of changing things for the better, whether it is a matter of the conflict in the Middle East, the combating of climate change or the fight against hunger and injustice in the Southern Hemisphere. Let us be honest: on our own we are not capable of doing this; as Europeans, we must instead work together in a single Union, act together and also raise our voice together. In exactly the same way, Europe will only count for anything economically by continuing to work on the internal market and by launching the unified currency on 1 January next year.
In fact, it is for all those reasons that I fail to understand the anti-globalists. Of course I am not talking about a small number of violent demonstrators whom we saw in action in Gothenburg, because they are just hooligans for whom only violence counts. No, I am talking about those who protest indignantly against internationalisation and globalisation. Perhaps not coincidentally a generation born into luxury and prosperity.
Within the European Union, globalisation is not a threat but a benefit. Joint global action enables the Union to do things that previously could not possibly be achieved in a continent traditionally divided by the Iron Curtain and national borders: a community approach to organised crime, for instance, agreements on the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, minimum standards to combat poverty and social exclusion. In short, the Union is not a threat but a boon.
Of course, more than fine rhetoric is required to restore the citizen' s confidence. More is needed than a plausible argument to reconcile Europeans with their institutions once more. There must be action on two fronts: on the one hand, a series of very practical decisions enabling visible solutions to be put forward to real problems with which the citizen is confronted daily; and, on the other hand, the mapping out of a wide-ranging vision of the future of Europe. We need a Union that avoids the ills that beset it today, namely lack of efficiency, lack of transparency and, especially, lack of democratic legitimacy.
Let me mention, first of all, the specific dossiers on which we want to work. Our first dossier will obviously be the introduction of the euro on 1 January and the development of a coherent economic policy to underpin monetary union.
I believe nothing will bring Europe closer to its citizens than the successful introduction of the euro; that is the presidency' s task and it will have to act like a good father to ensure that it comes about. That is why the Heads of State and Government will be examining an evaluation report in October, with the aim of ensuring that the introduction of the euro on 1 January goes smoothly. The evaluation will be accompanied by an information campaign aimed more specifically at small and medium-sized businesses and the most vulnerable groups of society; explaining the euro to them is, I believe, the best way of dispelling the fears that always go with an operation of such a scale.
All this, ladies and gentlemen, seems to me much more important than the endless squabbling about the value of the euro. As if we introduced the euro as an instrument for speculation on the foreign exchange market! That was not the purpose of the euro. Let us not forget that the aim - which will be achieved only when the euro is circulating physically both inside and outside the Union - was to create a single market, without currency fluctuations or exchange risks, in order to give a major boost to the Union' s economic growth.
Let us admit it, what else did we want to achieve with the euro? We wanted to give Europe a tangible expression of its existence. Yet, in order to exploit the advantages of the single market to the full, we must also integrate the financial markets, liberalise gas, electricity, telecommunications, post and transport, reduce state aids and make the fiscal package reality. The presidency nevertheless believes that, on this last point, progress must be made on every component of that package.
Madam President, I saw a few boats landing at Parliament this week and notified the security service. Not only were there language difficulties; the telephone line was so poor that it was almost impossible to communicate. I would be most obliged if the number on which the security service can be reached could also be clearly displayed in the House, so that if anyone wants to report an incident, they can do so quickly and efficiently.
Mr Rbig, we will be very happy to give you that number. Since you raise the subject, I should tell you that we were faced with some very difficult incidents yesterday. Demonstrators, they cannot be called visitors, caused a lot of problems. I must say that our security service really reacted very rapidly and very efficiently, and that efficiency meant everything was soon under control. I wanted to say that in this House.
Madam President, I understand that over the next few days, the Bureau will be discussing the question of languages and interpretation following the accession of the candidate countries. Because, as you know, we are all a little touchy on this subject which is, above all, a political issue and cannot be resolved by purely administrative measures, I should like to ask you to tell us what the Bureau's thoughts are on this and how you think we can all take part in this debate, which is absolutely vital.
Mrs Zorba, the guidelines you refer to will be adopted by the Bureau in September and between now and then the groups will have plenty of time to discuss them. I think it is very important that they should be able to do so.
Madam President, one comment perhaps, as the question of language has already been raised twice. I should like to point out that the question of language is regulated in the Rules of Procedure, which state that Parliament itself makes the final decision on how languages are to be regulated in the House. Any concerns - including about decisions by the Bureau - are therefore totally unfounded.
The next item is the Commission statement on the G8 Summit.
Madam President, I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk about the G8 Summit. At the suggestion of the Italian G8 Presidency the forthcoming summit in Genoa will focus on the one hand on global development issues, and on the other hand on some key related areas of concern such as the environment and food safety. The Commission fully supports this focus for the summit. Indeed, it is the G8 leaders' intention that Genoa should send a strong signal that the G8 countries are taking the concerns of their own citizens extremely seriously, as well as those of the developing world.
Following on from Okinawa last year, the G8 will be looking at development issues in a much more serious fashion. From the Commission's point of view the summit needs to address the following key questions in this area. First, the fight against communicable diseases. The European Union has taken a strong lead. The action plan on fighting communicable diseases was adopted by the Council earlier this year. Following Kofi Annan's call for the establishment of a global health fund, which was endorsed, I am pleased to say, by the UN General Assembly last week, it is expected that G8 members will provide their political and financial backing for the proposed fund. Mr Annan's presence in Genoa to take part in an 'outreach' meeting between the G8 and other leaders will help to focus attention on the global health fund issue.
Many issues remain, and we must make sure that the fund's focus and management is in line with the objectives of the European Union action plan. But a strong signal of European support in this area will be both natural and expected in Genoa.
Secondly, there is the issue of Third World debt. The G8 took an early lead on the debt of the poorest countries - the HIPC initiative - and we should now seek to go further. Mr Prodi and Prime Minister Verhofstadt will refer to the Council decision in May this year calling for the total alleviation of all remaining special loans granted to the least-developed countries under the first, second and third Lom Conventions.
Thirdly, there is the question of market access for the least-developed countries. We strongly support the efforts of the Italian G8 Presidency to broaden the debate on poverty reduction beyond debt relief. In particular, the links between poverty reduction and trade should be highlighted. In this context the 'everything but arms' initiative will of course be mentioned, and the Commission will insist that other G8 members should follow suit by providing duty-free and quota-free access for all products originating from the least-developed countries.
Turning now to the environment, G8 leaders will have a discussion on climate change. This will be President Bush's first G8 summit. The Commission will be keen, as will no doubt the other European participants, to discuss our concerns about the United States' present stance on climate change and on the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. We will work to ensure that the communiqu makes a clear reference to the scientific evidence to back up the urgency of international measures to mitigate climate change.
We, for our part, will reiterate our determination to press ahead with ratification of the Kyoto Protocol, and our hope that the reconvened 6th Conference of the Parties to the climate change convention, scheduled for Bonn, can find a means which allows the United States to stick with the process.
As regards food safety, the Commission is keen that the G8 conclusions include a reference to the precautionary principle. We remain committed to making systems responsive to the growing public awareness of food safety issues, the potential risks associated with food and the accelerating pace of change of developments in biotechnology. These are not the only issues on the agenda of the three-day meeting. Beyond the principal themes of development, environment and food safety, there will be a discussion on regional issues focusing on the Middle East and the Balkans, as well as on conflicts in Africa. Those subjects will be discussed by the Foreign Ministers' meeting, at which I will be present just before the main leaders meeting.
As usual the G8 summit will also be preceded by a G7 session, that is, without Russia, where the main topics of discussion will be the world economy, including oil prices and financial architecture. Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan will announce his plan for structural reforms in the run-up to the elections in his country. Leaders will also discuss trade with the aim of sending a clear unambiguous message on the launch of a new round at the fourth WTO ministerial meeting in Dohar in November.
Also in the context of the G7, nuclear safety issues will be discussed in relation both to the situation in Russia and to the need to maintain loan commitments to Ukraine, following the closure of the Chernobyl plant, for the construction of the K2R4 reactors there.
It has become G8 practice to arrange an outreach meeting with some Heads of State and Government from developing countries. In this vein, the Italian hosts have invited leaders from South Africa, Nigeria, Mali, Algeria, Bangladesh and El Salvador to attend a working session and a dinner which should focus mainly on the poverty reduction strategy and the global health fund. As I said earlier, this part of the summit will also be attended by the UN Secretary-General, as well as by the President of the World Bank and the heads of the World Trade Organisation, the World Health Organisation and the Food and Agriculture Organisation.
The G8 is not an organisation or an institution. It is not based on a treaty, it does not have a secretariat. The Group of 8 is an annual gathering of democratically elected leaders of the leading nations of the world. The European Commission is invited to participate, not least in view of its trade and other responsibilities on behalf of the whole Union. As in the past, Mr Prodi intends to make full use of this opportunity to convey the views and positions of the European Union. It is not enough that world leaders meet and discuss these issues between themselves, however. They must listen to the concerns of third countries and civil society and then enter into dialogue with them. That is why the G8 is increasingly organising side events and meetings with third countries and civil society alongside the summit.
I have already mentioned the outreach meetings with other leaders. The Japanese last year added an NGO centre in Okinawa. The Italians continue this year with a number of meetings that have already taken place and others set to take place on the eve of the summit. The Commission has extensive experience in its own relations and consultations with civil society - we have been keen to share our knowledge with G8 members, and we hope the encouragement of this type of dialogue will continue and will be developed further.
I will just make one final point. However much one agrees or disagrees with some representatives of civil society on issues such as globalisation, it seems to me exceptionally important to have an open dialogue which is not disfigured by street violence. Some of the scenes we have seen surrounding recent summits and meetings have, I think, sadly made it more difficult for legitimate representatives of civil society to get their point across to the leaders who are present. I feel that is a tragedy. It very unfairly devalues the case which those legitimate NGOs have to make, and I very much hope that they will make that point and that those who have been guilty of violence in the past will get the message.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament, adjourned on Thursday 5 July 2001.
I hope that you have all had an excellent holiday and that you are ready to start work on this session.
Ladies and gentlemen, I was very saddened to learn of the death of our fellow Member, Jacques Santkin, who passed away on 28 August. As you know, Jacques Santkin had been with us since February 2001 and was part of the Group of the Party of European Socialists. He was a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and was also a member of the delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council.
I would like to ask you to observe a minute' s silence in memory of our fellow Member.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is once again my sad duty to open this part-session with a further condemnation of the mindless and brutal terrorist attacks which occurred in Spain during the summer.
On behalf of the House, I would like to express our unwavering solidarity and our deepest sympathy to the families of the victims and I do so with a great deal of emotion and sadness.
The European Parliament today pays tribute to Justo Oreja Pedraza, a Spanish army general, Luis Ortz de la Rosa, member of the Spanish national police, Mikel Uribe, member of the regional Basque police, and Jos Javier Mgica Astibia, town councillor in Leiza for the Union of the People of Navarre, whose family is present today. I would like to say to his wife, children and his sister-in-law that we admire the courage you have shown in the face of this tragedy, which has taken a loved one from you.
Jos Javier Mgica Astibia always stood up for freedom and democracy and he refused to bow down to terror. Unfortunately, this cost him his life. Terrorism intends to continue its reign of terror by placing bombs in airports, on railways or in towns where there are tourists.
Our thoughts are also with Mara Eraunzetamurgil and her grandson, who were victims of a horrendous attack. We still do not know who carried this out.
Despite the diverse political views held by its Members, the European Parliament forcefully condemns these barbaric actions, as they constitute an absolute denial of democracy and the fundamental values on which the European Union is founded.
I would like to ask you to observe a minute' s silence.
By way of a letter dated 20 July 2001, I received a request from the Spanish government, via the intermediary of the Spanish permanent representative, for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Silvio Berlusconi and Mr Marcello Dell' Utri, which was drawn up by the Spanish judicial authorities.
Pursuant to Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure, this request is submitted to the relevant committee, namely the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
In order to assist matters, I would inform you that there are no grounds for the request for the waiver of Mr Berlusconi' s parliamentary immunity, as he has not been a member of the European Parliament since 11 June 2001.
Madam President, I would like to speak on behalf of the Socialist Group on the announcement you have just made. We take note of that announcement. We believe it is a step forward. However, we would like to express our concern and criticism of the way in which this issue has been dealt with.
You and I are Members of Parliament. We have shared responsibilities in Parliament and we also share a legal training which reminds us of that aphorism, 'justice delayed is justice denied' . You have just shown how, in this case, justice is surely not going to be done in relation to one of the Members of the European Parliament, apart from the fact that the requests for waiver of immunity must also give the Members of the European Parliament the opportunity to defend themselves, something which has not been possible in this case for a year now.
I would like to point out on behalf of my group that we - independently of the electioneering considerations we have been accused of - have believed that this issue is important for the European Parliament, for our dignity, and we believe it is a step forward that the Committee on Legal Affairs is aware of this.
However, given that the Presidency' s interpretation is in direct conflict with the integrating nature of Community law, I would ask you, Madam President, having become aware of this case, that we might resolve the issue of how we deal with waivers of immunity in this House in a positive manner and according to the integrating nature of European law. Therefore, I would ask you once again to approach the Committee on Constitutional Affairs so that it may make a proposal for a reform of the Rules of Procedure which would clearly establish how we should act, not only in cases such as this, but in all cases of waiver of immunity.
Madam President, a small error: in the English version of the Minutes, at the end of that section, it stated that Mr Napolitano is chairman of the CONT - I presume the Committee on Budgetary Control. In fact, he is chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
Madam President, I wish to raise a matter of a highly sensitive nature for this House and which affects the debate about enlargement. It concerns a statement by the Turkish Foreign Ministry about Mr Poos' report on the accession of Cyprus to the European Union. In that statement, the Turkish Foreign Ministry makes an unfair and slanderous attack on an honourable Member who presented his report to the relevant committee. The committee accepted the report as it stood with only two votes against. I can see that parliamentarianism in Turkey has not yet reached the stage where they can understand what is in this report and what responsibility, if we can call it that, Mr Poos has taken on. It is a report of Parliament. I would therefore like to see Parliament respond to this unfair attack.
Madam President, to give you just one example of the bad taste, it says here in point 1 of the statement:
'Mr Poos is known for both his opposition to Turkey and for his personal links with the government of Cyprus.'
(DE) That is a slander bordering on the criminal. I would like to see a response to this accusation from Turkey not from Mr Poos but from this House and also from the Commission.
I would just like to tell Mr Helmer that the officials are currently working to put the British flag back. There was a problem this morning with the British flag, which we are trying to sort out as soon as possible.
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on the situation in the Middle East.
Madam President, Commissioner Patten, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin by apologising for arriving slightly late, but I have come straight from Brussels. I would like to thank you for your understanding.
Ladies and gentlemen, as Minister Michel said when he spoke before the European Parliament' s Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence Policy on 28 August 2001, there has, in recent months, been an escalation of violence in the Middle East. The alarming result is the total collapse of trust between the two parties. On the ground, this has created a profound sense of helplessness amongst all the people concerned.
Unfortunately, not a day goes by that is without bloody incidents and new acts of provocation, thereby indefinitely postponing a cease-fire, and an end to the infernal cycle of reprisals, all the while adding to the growing list of victims. This situation, recently described by Minister Hubert Vdrine as 'monstrous and revolting' , is naturally giving rise to grave concerns about stability in a region that is on our doorstep. The international community cannot tolerate such an escalation for much longer. It must strongly condemn the aggravating factors, namely the terrorism and the suicide attacks perpetrated by Palestinians in Israel. Apart from the fact that these acts of terrorism are an abomination in that they target innocent civilians, they simply encourage Israel to pursue an increasingly repressive policy.
Shooting at Israelis, whether Jewish settlers or soldiers, by Palestinians activists from Palestinian-controlled zones, and also the excessive and disproportionate use of force by Israel only fuels the cycle of violence. Using combat aircraft in residential areas, launching missiles to systematically destroy buildings housing police and security services of the Palestinian Authority, and assassinating Palestinian activists are hardly convincing components in a strategy geared towards achieving peace and security. Israeli military incursions into areas that have been transferred to Palestinian control are violations of signed agreements. The closure of Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem, especially Orient House, and the seizure of files are political measures that are not very likely to appease Palestinians.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, if we consider the current prospects of resuming a direct dialogue, where would that leave us? To start with, it is against a very worrying backdrop of the radicalisation of positions by the different parties involved in the conflict that the Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr Shimon Peres, recently and publicly proposed resuming a direct dialogue with the Palestinian Authority in order to scale down the violence and to enforce a cease-fire, two objectives which have so far seemed out of reach. During his recent visit to the region, the German Foreign Affairs Minister, Mr Joschka Fischer, managed to obtain an agreement from the Palestinian leader to set up a meeting between Mr Arafat and Mr Peres.
It is hoped that this meeting, which will obviously require very careful preparation and preliminary meetings at intermediary levels, will succeed in overcoming the current security deadlock. It is, in fact, to help with these preparations that the EU Special Envoy, Ambassador Moratinos, visited the region at the end of August. Unfortunately, his mission had to be diverted very quickly from its original objective when fresh violence and tension erupted following Israel' s assassination of Mr Abdul Ali Mustafa, the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Front, on 27 August. This assassination led to extremely violent clashes in South Jerusalem, where the Jewish settlement of Gilo is located, as well as in the Beit Jalla and Bethlehem districts, located in the border region of the Palestinian West Bank.
Mr President, this concerns a matter arising from the Minutes in connection with the distribution of the report promised by Mr Kinnock in response to my oral question on Monday, which was raised in the Chamber yesterday afternoon. I should like to confirm that this report is available. I received it by e-mail from Mr Kinnock' s office, but as far as I can tell it has not yet been officially distributed to Members. I know that Mr Kinnock was very keen that we should all have it as soon as possible so can I ask you once again to make sure that this is distributed.
On the same topic could I ask you, Mr President, on behalf of all the Members of this Parliament, if we could have a similar report to the one prepared by the Commission on the progress of the human resource reforms as regards the work that is going on with the staff of Parliament. We are currently in a position where we know less about the progress of the personnel reforms in this House than we do in the Commission. Could I ask you to discuss with your colleagues and arrange for a statement and a report to be made to this House as soon as possible about the progress of these crucial reforms which were solidly supported by the House when it approved my report last year?
On the first part, I was here when the President gave you the assurance that Mr Kinnock' s report would be distributed. I will ask the services to make sure that is done.
On the second part, the Bureau of Parliament is meeting tonight. Unfortunately I will not be there but I will ask for this to be raised at the Bureau this evening.
The next item is the report (A5-0264/2001) by Gerhard Schmid, on behalf of the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System, on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and commercial communications (ECHELON interception system) (2001/2098(INI)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, more than a year ago the European Parliament set up a special committee to ascertain whether there was in fact a global interception system for which the US National Security Agency was ultimately responsible and which was able to intercept any communication by telephone, fax or e-mail in Europe. This system is allegedly operated by a group of states which includes one of the Member States of the European Union, namely the United Kingdom. Now that the Cold War is over, the main function of the system appears to be industrial espionage. The system, it is alleged, bears the code name Echelon.
This, Mr President, was a difficult investigative mission, because the European Parliament has no access at all under any circumstances to the files of the intelligence services of the EU Member States, let alone access to details of the activities of American agencies. However, after a year of painstaking investigation, we are able to communicate the following to the House without any lingering shadow of doubt: first of all, there is no intelligence system operated by the secret services of any one state by means of which any communication in Europe can be intercepted. This allegation must be consigned to the domain of creative journalism! The assertion is not made any more credible by the fact that it is repeated, and regrettably so, in a study commissioned by the European Parliament, a fact that lends it a certain cachet of respectability.
What we are looking at here is not what we were expected to find. Telecommunications obey the laws of physics, and without access to the media of communication it is impossible to intercept the messages they carry. The secret services do not possess magic powers with which they can alter the laws of physics! The second point we are able to make, however, is that there is indeed an interception system, and these are its characteristics: it operates globally and is run by an intelligence alliance comprising the parties to the UKUSA Agreement, namely the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. There is nothing coincidental about this combination of states, which has its roots in the Second World War. By and large, it only has access to intercontinental communications which are transmitted with the aid of communications satellites or undersea cables serving the UKUSA countries.
Communications within Europe, therefore, are scarcely affected, but communications with African, Arabic and Latin American countries most certainly are. We do not know exactly how much local radio communication can be intercepted by embassies, but it is evident that this does not represent the bulk of intelligence operations. By way of contrast to police surveillance operations, which always target an individual or a clearly defined group of people, the system concerning us here intercepts every communication to which it has access and feeds it into a computer search engine. On the basis of a catalogue of search terms, the search engine selects those communications that are likely to be of interest to the intelligence services. In other words, the system works like a vacuum cleaner and the intelligence services operate the filter. In technical terms this is known as strategic communications monitoring.
The search engine can identify telephone numbers, the voices of prime targets and the content of e-mails and typed faxes. Given the present state of the art, these search engines will not be able to interpret handwritten faxes and spoken messages in the foreseeable future, which means that these forms of communication cannot be automatically processed by the intelligence services. In addition, we have evidence that the system does indeed have the code name Echelon. Its name, however, is irrelevant. It might just as well be called Rumpelstiltskin; the important thing for us is what it does.
These are the findings, and let me add that we are not simply hypothesising. We can back up these statements with a strong chain of evidence that could stand up in a court of law. Those who wish to know precise details will have to read the report for themselves. Suffice to say that, if we had made any false allegations in this report, you can safely assume that the intelligence services of the countries in question would have been only too delighted to take us apart in public! This they did not do, which speaks volumes.
How do we assess these findings? One of our assessment criteria must be to ask what our own services actually do. That is not the sole criterion, but it must be taken into consideration if we intend to hold an honest debate on this subject. Most of the intelligence services in the EU Member States engage in strategic communications monitoring.
Only Austria, Belgium, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg and Portugal do not use such technology.
Secondly, it goes without saying that the purpose for which strategic monitoring is used will also affect our assessment. If it is targeted at internationally organised crime, drug trafficking, trafficking in human beings, the arms trade, terrorism, proliferation or sanctions busting, or if it is used to protect national security, there can be no questioning the legitimacy of its purpose as such. But if it is being used to spy on foreign companies in order to tip the competitive balance in favour of domestic industries, that is quite a different matter.
Thirdly, the end does not justify the means. In short, the end is not everything, for each individual case of eavesdropping is an invasion of privacy. It is not a problem of quantity either. Human rights are individual rights; they are not a matter of statistics. Such an invasion of privacy is only permissible on certain conditions. The case law of the European Court of Human Rights is crystal clear in this respect. Briefly, the conditions are as follows: there must be a legal basis for such an operation - it cannot be arbitrary; a value judgment must be made, the breach of privacy being weighed against the morality of its purpose; the operation must be foreseeable, which means that the general public must know that such a system exists, and recourse to interception must only be permitted if there is no alternative. It is, in other words, an ultima ratio. There are Members of this House who agree that it is acceptable for the police to intercept communications in pursuance of a court order for the purpose of criminal prosecution. But in the case of the intelligence services, they call it an infringement of human rights. I fully understand anyone expressing political opposition to this type of action by the secret services. I can see the logic of that. It is not my position, but I can follow their reasoning. But anyone who says it is illegal is disregarding the rulings of our own European Court of Human Rights.
Industrial espionage is certainly not a legitimate reason for intercepting communications. All intelligence services do, of course, deal with economic issues too, examining developments in financial and commodity markets, for example. To that extent most of the services engage in espionage in the economic domain. But we are not criticising them for that. The problem arises when this espionage goes beyond the clarification of general security issues and the intelligence services pass on details to industrialists in their own country in order to give their companies a competitive advantage.
Such behaviour between EU Member States, furthermore, would be incompatible with Community law, because it constitutes a type of prohibited state aid. On the international stage it is more than just an unfriendly act, and between allies it is nothing short of a scandal. Incidentally, intercepting communications is not the preferred method of industrial espionage, which is generally conducted by conventional means. But there are individual cases in which the instrument of interception can be used to great effect.
The United States, as you know, has come in for the heaviest criticism. The United States has always denied that intelligence is passed on directly to US companies. It has admitted, however, that it intercepts detailed communications concerning major contracts that are open to international tender. The argument used to justify these measures is that European companies would offer bribes and that there is a need for a defence against this.
This position, to put it very politely and diplomatically, must be scrutinised. First of all, we know that US corporations engage in bribery too. In the latest Bribe Payers Index published by Transparency International, the United States occupies a mid-table position among the world' s major exporting countries.
Secondly, this type of thing is now prohibited within the OECD by a Convention, which the Member States of the European Union have transposed into national law. For the United States, despite this, to remain entrenched in the cowboy mentality which holds that might is right would be a denial of the principle that such problems can be solved by formal international agreements.
Mr President, as a democrat, I have to take on board decisions even if I do not like them. Yesterday, however, in connection with my report, a decision was taken which points in two directions. After we had already discussed the legal basis for this decision, and also raised appropriate objections to it, to which we received no response from the Commission, this House decided yesterday to agree to the Commission's legislative proposal and then passed a resolution rejecting the Commission's proposal. This is recorded under item 11 of the Minutes.
I would now like to propose that the resolution passed by this Parliament yesterday be referred to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for the purposes of clarification under Article 148(3). There are two specific reasons for this: Firstly, we need clarification as to which of the two resolutions in this instance is actually valid. Secondly, we need, for the future too, clarification in the Rules of Procedure as to what is to happen in cases such as this. For if, as appears to me, votes are being, as it were, immediately corrected by the authorities, I find that not exactly in order. I believe that a correction should in principle be made if the Committee on Constitutional Affairs so decides. I therefore base my objection on Article 148(3). I request this House's Committee on Constitutional Affairs to clarify the situation and set down a ruling in the Rules of Procedure as to how we should proceed in future cases of this sort.
Mr Swoboda, I understand the reasons for your request. I think the President will need to think it over very carefully and assess whether or not to give it positive follow-up. I cannot give you an answer off the cuff. I feel it would be discourteous to say no, but it would also be too hasty on my part to give an answer right away. If your request is accepted the committee responsible should be the one for the Rules of Procedure, which is currently the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
(A5-0280/2001) by Mr Bsch, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman for the year 2000 (C5-302/2001 - 2001/2043(COS));
(A5-0245/2001) by Mr Perry, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions on the European Ombudsman' s Special Report to the European Parliament following the own-initiative inquiry into the existence and the public accessibility, in the different Community institutions and bodies, of a Code of Good Administrative Behaviour
(A5-0240/2001), by Mrs Almeida Garrett on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the amendment of Article 3 of the Statute of the European Ombudsman (1999/2215(ACI)).
Mr President, in 1993 the Maastricht Treaty established the right to petition the European Parliament and the right to complain to the European Ombudsman as rights of European citizenship. At the Nice summit in December 2000, these rights were enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights. The reports and resolutions which the European Parliament is debating today concern the present state of these vital constitutional rights of European citizens. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this important debate, which goes to the heart of European citizenship.
Before commenting on some of the reports, I would like to express my thanks to Commissioner Loyola de Palacio for continuing to ensure that the Commission respects deadlines for answers to the Ombudsman's inquiries and provides answers which are complete and accurate. This good cooperation is vital to ensure that the Ombudsman can deal with complaints promptly and effectively and thereby fulfils his mission of enhancing relations between the citizens and the Community institutions and bodies.
I would also like to pay tribute today to the work of Mr Jean-Claude Eeckhout. He will soon be retiring from his post in the Secretariat-General of the Commission where he deals, amongst other things, with relations between the Commission and the European Ombudsman. To me, he represents the model public servant. He is devoted not only to the European ideal, but also to the hard practical work of improving administration for the benefit of citizens.
I now turn to the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour and congratulate Mr Roy Perry on his excellent report. It is appropriate that Mr Perry should be the rapporteur, since he first launched the idea of such a code some years ago, in the report of the Committee on Petitions on its activities in 1996-1997. Jean-Maurice Dehousse, rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, has also played an important role. He has stressed that the code should have a firm legal basis and suggested a practical way to achieve this.
I hope that this report will be followed by the rapid adoption of a regulation. The Nice Charter includes good administration as one of the fundamental rights of citizenship. I cannot understand why anyone should oppose the idea of Community law providing citizens with as high a standard of legal protection vis--vis the European administration as national laws already provide vis--vis the Member States' administrations.
The report of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the Statute of the European Ombudsman is unusual because the Treaty makes the European Parliament the legislator and also entrusts to it the power of initiative. The role of the Council is limited to giving its approval to the Parliament's text by qualified majority, whilst the Commission gives an opinion.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Teresa Almeida Garrett, for the principled approach which she has taken to the legislative process. As she has emphasised, the original Statute was drafted nearly a decade ago. Its provisions concerning the inspection of documents and the hearing of witnesses need to be updated in the light of the greater emphasis on administrative openness and the need to gain the confidence of the public and promote a modern administrative culture at Community level.
The report of the Committee on Petitions on the Ombudsman's Annual Report for the year 2000 is also before you. I congratulate the rapporteur Mr Bsch for his excellent and constructive report, which rightly focuses on the need to serve European citizens effectively.
I fully agree with the rapporteur that the Ombudsman should deal with complaints as quickly as possible. To this end, we have continued our efforts to eliminate unnecessary delay by insisting that the institutions and bodies respect the deadlines for responding to complaints and by improving our own efficiency.
We have made progress towards achieving our internal management targets of acknowledging complaints within one week, deciding on their admissibility within one month and closing inquiries within one year. At the end of August last year, there were 65 cases still open after one year. By August 2001 the comparable figure was 25 cases. Of these, one remains open because we have submitted a special report to the European Parliament. In five other cases, the Statute lays down that the institution concerned has a further three months to produce a detailed opinion.
Mr Bsch's report also refers to the problems which the Committee on Petitions has faced in obtaining the information needed to deal effectively with citizens' petitions. An example of such problems is the case of the petition concerning the regulation of the Lloyd's insurance market.
In my view, the most effective way to improve the situation could be through strengthening cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions, especially in relation to petitions about infringements of Community law by Member States, where the Commission plays a vital role through the so-called Article 226 procedure.
We would be ready to handle the preparation of such cases in a professional way and thereby facilitate the work of the Committee on Petitions.
Ladies and gentlemen, I open this extraordinary meeting with the emotion and the sadness that this horrific event, the scale of which would have seemed inconceivable, inspires in us all.
The purpose of this meeting is first of all to demonstrate our solidarity with the American people, who have just been struck by a barbaric act of terrorism, to show our compassion for the victims, for the final toll will certainly be appalling, and to demonstrate our support for all those who are working tirelessly to save what further lives they can. Yesterday, I expressed this solidarity to President Bush, on my own behalf and on behalf of the entire European Parliament and gave him my assurance that the people of Europe are standing shoulder to shoulder with the United States in the tragic ordeal the American nation is suffering. When terrorism strikes in a Member State of the European Union we all feel concerned, and these appalling attacks inspire in me the same feeling of disgust and indignation. Today, we share the pain of the American people. It is the United States, that great democracy which did so much to help Europe protect its freedom that has just been attacked, but a blow has also been dealt to the sacrosanct values of life and democracy.
The date of 11 September 2001 will remain forever engraved on the memory of humanity. This tragedy calls for a calm reaction on our part but also for the closest cooperation between all countries that reject terrorism so that the perpetrators of these abominable crimes and those who have supported them can be identified, pursued, arrested and tried and so that blind terrorism can, at last, be eradicated from the surface of the globe. It also requires the international community to commit itself to finding a peaceful solution to the conflicts that nourish and sustain fanaticism. Over and above statements, over and above the common response to terrorism that we hope and pray for, all players on the international stage must now shoulder their responsibilities. From now on resolute action must be the order of the day and I know that the European Union will have to take decisions of vital importance.
I welcome the presence here today of Prime Minister Verhofstadt, Mr Michel, Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Mr Prodi, President of the Commission.
The European Union will have no credibility if it does not establish a common policy on combating terrorism. The European Commission and the European Parliament have stated this clearly, particularly during our last part-session. I hope that the Council will study these proposals without delay. Since the Tampere European Council, some tentative progress has, admittedly, been made with regard to the European area of freedom, security and justice, but this falls considerably short of what is needed. We must go further. Although the European Union has made its presence felt on the international stage, in the Middle East, at Durban and even in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, yesterday' s events are proof, if proof were needed, of the imperative need to establish a Europe of defence and a genuinely common foreign and security policy as quickly as possible. An extraordinary European Council meeting could provide a timely boost to all these elements for, as we know, history waits for no man.
Ladies and gentlemen, let us now observe a minute' s silence for all the victims.
- (FR) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, just over 24 hours ago the United States was hit by an attack of unprecedented scale and ferocity. At this very moment men, women and children of all ages, of all convictions and of all origins are struggling for their lives, while others are mourning the loss of loved ones and others still are suffering the anguish of waiting for reassuring news about the fate of those who are missing.
Madam President, our thoughts are with our American friends who have been assailed by this despicable and barbaric violence. We would like to be able to express just how much we share their suffering. Today, we feel that we are all Americans. I say that, and let there be no mistake about this, because it is not just the United States and its population that has been targeted, but democracy itself. Democracy and its values of liberty, tolerance and humanity, which are the exact opposite of blind and suicidal terrorism. As human beings, as believers in democracy, and as Europeans, we cannot nor will we ever be able to accept this barbarity.
Madam President, the Union that we want to build has its origins precisely in the rejection of the hate, fanaticism and murderous madness that nearly led to the downfall of our continent. And in the face of these tragedies a comprehensive range of concrete and firm gestures is called for. The various Member States have taken essential initiatives to come to the aid of the United States of America.
Madam President, on behalf of the Union, and following consultation with the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, and the leaders of all the Member States, I have conveyed our deepest sympathy to President Bush. As a token of solidarity and sympathy, the Union has decided that on Friday, 14 September a day of mourning and solidarity with the American people will be observed.
The Heads of State and Government of the fifteen EU Member States will be issuing a joint political declaration in the morning. At 12 noon, a three minutes' silence will be observed, during which all activity will be suspended.
(Loud applause) The candidate countries for accession to the European Union are also invited to join us in this act of solidarity. With this expression of solidarity, in addition to the political decisions which we will be taking in the coming weeks, the people of the European Union wish to express their deep sympathy with the grief, and particularly the pain, which is affecting the American people today.
Madam President, Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen, an extraordinary meeting of the Commission took place this morning. We observed a minute' s silence and then discussed the various political aspects of this appalling tragedy which fall within the direct remit of the Commission.
This afternoon, I stressed before the European Parliament and the General Affairs Council that Europe must demonstrate full solidarity with the American people and adopt a common European position on all aspects of these tragic events.
The Commission is appalled by these criminal, barbaric deeds and has already sent its condolences to the victims and their families and expressed its sympathy for the American people. Our cooperation with the United States in the fight against terrorism is more essential than ever and must be pursued. Over the next few days, the Commission will examine the other proposals made in order to be able to take increasingly effective action to fight terrorism.
We are fortunate in that the economic and social structure of our countries is strong and resilient. Therefore, even in these sad circumstances, we can remain calm and confident, and we will not allow terrorism to divide us or to divide the world in its goals or in its endeavours to achieve them.
We must reflect at this time on the role of Europe. This criminal action is an attack on all our common values and on freedom itself. After this event, nothing will ever be the same. We therefore need to show great solidarity and friendship towards the American people and their government, and the European institutions and governments will work closely with our US and other friends at this tragic time and in the future.
However, there is also a purely European dimension. The tragic events we have witnessed highlight once again the need for a united, strong, resolute, unified Europe which protects freedom and safeguards peace in Europe and throughout the world, a Europe that acts united alongside countries which share our goals, that acts united to protect and promote the values of freedom and solidarity, the values which are the basis of the democracy preserved by Parliament.
I invite you, therefore, to reflect upon yesterday' s tragedy. Our citizens will only be able ensure peace and stability for themselves and for their children if they are united in their actions and if they feel that they can count on Europe. This is the path we must take to safeguard our people: we must follow it courageously, resolutely and responsibly.
- (FR) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like, first of all, on behalf of the Council, to express our immense horror, outrage and revulsion at the tragic events which hit the United States yesterday morning. I wish here, on behalf of the European Union, on behalf not only of its leaders but also of all the citizens of Europe, to reiterate our most sincere sympathy for the victims and their families and for the American people and the government of the United States. This abominable act, which has caused such pain to the American people, is of course also an attack on the universal values which Europe has always shared with America. I would like, on behalf of the Council, to solemnly reaffirm here the unfailing solidarity of the peoples of Europe with the American people in defending these values. We want the United States to be aware that Europe is by its side in combating the evil of terrorism, no matter what form it may take. We cannot allow anonymous terror to undermine the values of the free and democratic world. We will stand together in attacking the major threat represented by large-scale terrorism. The battle against this scourge will be all the more effective to the extent that it is supported by preventive actions and a detailed political dialogue with the countries of those regions of the world where terrorism has its roots. Yesterday' s terrorist attack on the territory of the United States is an unprecedented act of provocation and of particularly loathsome cruelty. Acts of such barbarity, terror and cowardice cannot be tolerated. The scale of this tragedy demands an appropriate response. In conjunction with its allies, the European Union will examine all possible means of preventing such acts and of responding to them in an appropriate manner. The European Union will step up its activity in the international bodies responsible for the fight against terrorism with a view to ensuring that the perpetrators, accomplices and sponsors of acts of terrorism are rendered powerless. However, our determination should, under no circumstances, fail to go hand in hand with responsible prudence. At this moment we do not know the identity of the perpetrators, sponsors and possible accomplices of these terrible attacks. These are essential factors in being able to judge and react in a rational manner with a responsible and meaningful attitude. We must avoid any type of impromptu action.
While awaiting a response to these questions, our governments have taken the necessary steps to protect their people. The Council has been informed of security measures adopted as a matter of urgency by the Member States. In order to maximise cooperation between us, the Council has asked the Justice, Home Affairs and Transport Councils to take whatever measures are necessary to maintain the highest level of security as quickly as possible, particularly in the area of air transport, together with all measures required to prevent other attacks. The Justice and Home Affairs Council on 27 September and the informal Transport Council on 14 September will evaluate those measures already taken and any that may be necessary to complement them. The Extraordinary Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers has condemned these acts of barbarity, which are an insult to our common values, in the strongest terms. We have declared 14 September 2001 a day of mourning in the 15 Member States. We have asked the presidency to maintain close contact with the United States so as to study with them how best to provide whatever help may be required. At the request of several Member States, the Secretary General of NATO has informed the Council of the discussions in progress within that organisation.
I can now read to you the declaration by the European Union:
"The Council of the European Union, meeting in special session today, in the presence of the Secretary General of the Atlantic Alliance, expressed its horror at yesterday' s terrorist attacks in the United States. The Council stressed its complete solidarity with the government of the United States and the American people at this terrible time and extended its deepest sympathy to all the victims and their families. We ask all Europeans to observe three minutes of silence on Friday, 14 September at 12 noon and we also declare 14 September 2001 a day of mourning. These horrendous acts are an attack not only on the United States but against humanity itself and the values and freedoms we all share. The life and work of our open and democratic societies will continue undeterred. The Union utterly condemns the perpetrators and sponsors of these acts of barbarism. The Union and its Member States will spare no efforts in helping identify, bring to justice and punish those responsible: there will be no safe haven for terrorists and their sponsors. The Union will work closely with the United States and all partners to combat international terrorism. All international organisations, particularly the United Nations, must be engaged and all relevant international instruments, including those concerned with the financing of terrorism, must be fully implemented. The Community and its Member States have offered the United States all possible assistance with search and rescue operations. Discussions are underway to establish what help would be most useful. Recalling the strong and enduring ties which exist between the European Union and the United States, the Council has asked the presidency to stay in close contact with the government of the United States in order to convey this message of solidarity."
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament, adjourned on Wednesday 12 September 2001.
The Minutes of the sittings of Thursday 6 and Wednesday 12 September 2001 have been distributed.
Madam President, although I know that we have more important things to do today, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that, on 6 September, I raised objections to the Minutes of the previous day and also asked - with a view to having these issues in general clarified, and not just this particular instance - that the committee responsible for dealing with agenda questions be asked to look into the matter of a vote result being retrospectively altered. Towards midday, I raised another objection and referred to my first one, but I have to date received no reply, and I do think that a Member is entitled to be given answers.
So I ask you firstly: do you think that a Member is entitled to be given answers when he raises objections? And secondly: when can I expect to receive one?
Yes, Mr Swoboda, of course. I believe that Members are entitled to receive a reply to their comments and I can assure you that this matter will be sorted out.
Madam President, of course Mr Swoboda is entitled to receive an accurate reply. I just want to ask your services to give it on the basis of the midday debate. Not to be too blunt about it, I had the feeling that Mr Swoboda, on the day itself, tried to use an amendment of the Minutes to change the outcome of this House's vote. For this reason, I ask that the midday debate should be taken as the basis of any answer your services give to Mr Swoboda, and please be so kind as to let me have a copy of it. I am quite sure that your services understood perfectly well what this House had in mind!
Mr Jarzembowski, we shall look into the whole matter very carefully.
Ladies and gentlemen, Commander Massoud visited the European Parliament on 4 April 2001. He was recently assassinated in a cowardly attack by his opponents, a few days before the terrible attacks on New York and Washington.
I had invited him because he embodied the hopes of the overwhelming majority of people in Afghanistan for a future of peace and freedom. He had warned us against the Taliban regime' s tacit support for international terrorism and he did everything in his power to fight against those who misused Islam in order to flout the most basic human rights. He sent a strong message to us to help him to establish peace as soon as possible.
I regret that the West did not heed this message and did not do more to help this brave man. Many of you met him and were impressed by his intellect and his human qualities. I would like to ask you to pay tribute to him by observing a minute' s silence.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to draw your attention to a communication that I shall now give to you on security measures at the European Parliament.
As you know, the dreadful terrorist attacks in the United States have fuelled quite legitimate feelings of concern within the European Parliament itself. The Sunday Telegraph even reported that we were the target of very serious threats, which had been thwarted. I would like to confirm that the European Parliament has never known of any threats. On Monday, the prefect of the Bas Rhin department called me personally in order to tell me that he formally denied that these threats had been made. As you know, the French authorities also formally denied the threats, as confirmed in an official press release. I would add that the British Secret Services also claimed that they had no knowledge of them. In fact, I intend to send a letter to the editor of the Sunday Telegraph to protest against the newspaper publishing such serious and inaccurate information.
I can assure you, however, that the staff of the Bureau are constantly monitoring the issue of security of the European Parliament, the vice-presidents, the Quaestors, the President and General Secretariat. We took a number of measures to increase security, particularly in December 2000, at Christmas, when there were rumours circulating that Strasbourg cathedral was a target. Given that the cathedral is close by, a series of measures was of course taken at that time.
Immediately after the events of 11 September, the Secretary-General and I were in contact, and we have introduced additional measures to further increase checks on people and luggage at the entrances of the three European Parliament buildings. I would add that we are, of course, in constant contact with the other European institutions as well as with the governments of the host countries of the European Parliament.
Lastly, the Bureau is meeting this evening in order to consider a series of new measures proposed by the Secretary-General which aim to extend - and I did say 'extend' - security measures. I trust everyone will cooperate so these necessary measures are a success. Thank you in advance.
Mr President, my name is not on the list of those present at yesterday' s meeting, but I was present, as shown by the signatures to all my group' s meetings. I would be grateful if you could have this oversight remedied.
Mr President, I sat here throughout the debate yesterday on the statements by the Commission and the Council in relation to the tragedy in the United States. Not a single mention was made of the crisis being faced by the aviation industry in Europe as a result of this atrocity. It is incumbent on this House to make clear to the Commission and the Council that aid needs to be provided to the European airline industry and to the aviation industry in general, so that we can maintain a European aviation industry, particularly our airlines. Otherwise, we would be in a very serious situation, particularly if, as is proposed, the United States provides aid to their airlines. It is of the utmost importance that the tens of thousands of jobs currently under threat in the aviation industry are saved.
Mr De Rossa, we have noted your comments. The agenda for the next session will be set by the Conference of Presidents. We will put forward your suggestion.
The next item is the report (A5-0274/2991) by Mr Marinho, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative by the governments of the French Republic, the Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of Belgium for the adoption by the Council of a Framework Decision on the execution in the European Union of orders freezing assets or evidence (5126/2001 - C50055/2001 - 2001/0803(CNS)).
Mr President, this report concerns the recognition by one Member State of orders made by a court in another Member State on the freezing of assets or evidence within its territory in order to ensure the integrity of the legal process up to the final judgment. This framework decision, which is an initiative by the governments of France, Sweden and Belgium, is to enter into force by 31 December 2002 and will apply to all the Member States without any need for ratification, a very important point indeed. This is the general position regarding mechanisms for the recognition of criminal sentences which have existed up to now. In short this is about ensuring that an order made in one Member State automatically guarantees that assets and evidence essential for the prosecution and punishment of a crime and which may be located in any part of the European Union are not lost, do not disappear or are not concealed from criminal investigation. In the original version of the decision, this mutual recognition mechanism relates to cross-border crimes such as drug trafficking, fraud affecting the European Communities' financial interests, laundering of the proceeds of crime, counterfeiting of the euro, corruption and trafficking in human beings.
However, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs considered that this classification of offences, which is limited to types of crime relating in particular to the functioning of the single market, excludes other criminal offences and especially, and this is indeed topical, the type of crime we are most concerned with now, crime relating to terrorism. I believe that the new version of Article 2, prepared with the invaluable help of Mrs Palcio Vallelersundi and approved by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, is far more appropriate and effective in the context of an area of freedom, security and justice. It is a matter of strengthening the principle of mutual recognition which will be the basis for the prosecution of criminals and criminal organisations in the European Union. I think that we are now perfectly aware of the vital importance of this, and I therefore call on this Chamber to adopt Amendment No 5 on Article 2 of the original proposal for a decision, and ask the Commission and the Council to take this on board. This will bring the proposal for a decision before us in line with others which will soon follow in relation to the war on terrorism, as announced yesterday by Commissioner Vitorino.
Mr President, this decision, in as far as it goes, will make a small contribution to the creation of a European area of justice, but it is these small things, these small stones, that will build the foundations of a European area of justice capable of protecting our citizens. In this way we can counter the judicial void that exists in Europe and thus fight against the inertia and bureaucracy of the institutions. It is our job to prove to the public that Europe is also there to protect them, and that a European civil and criminal legal system is possible. This is about promoting citizenship, of course, but it is also about fighting the anonymous and stateless crime which is so prevalent. Not even the greatest pessimists would deny that these are steps in the right direction. Isolationist sovereignty makes crime easier and helps criminals. As from tomorrow, and I mean tomorrow, the date of the Extraordinary European Council, we will be speeding up the creation of a Europe of freedoms, that is to say the largest area of democracy, freedom and justice in the world.
Mr President, I endorse what the rapporteur, Mr Marinho, said. The truly tragic events of last week emphasise the importance of the fight against terrorism and organised crime. The coalition we are striving to build across the world to fight against terrorism is trying to find a cure to the problem, but there is also the issue of prevention in terms of security and diplomacy. Other steps too are necessary if we are going to prevent those kinds of crimes from happening again.
The second directive on money laundering is already in conciliation and we are trying to get it through. We have to recognise that at European Union level we need only one legal area. It is illogical for people to apply for asylum between one Member State and another within the European Union. It is illogical for us to have a situation where a warrant for arrest is not applicable across the whole of the European Union. There was a case where someone fled to the United Kingdom from France and managed to stall his extradition back to France for the crime of terrorism. He has actually faced the courts for a period of five years.
The series of reports we have before us this morning attempt to move things forward. Mr Marinho's report is part of that initiative by the French, Swedish and Belgian governments and I congratulate him and them on this report. A judicial decision in one Member State must have automatic application across the whole of the Union. We must have the mutual recognition that Mr Marinho calls for.
Mr bin Laden has a London bank account. One might hope that this report will make it easier for that account and similar accounts elsewhere in Europe to be frozen if that was proven necessary. On behalf of the party of European Socialists, I support this report and the similar measures that will follow in the other reports this morning and in subsequent weeks and months. The best memorial for those innocent people who died so tragically last week is to take action to prevent its repetition. This is one small part of that process.
Mr President, the Commission welcomes the initiative by France, Sweden and Belgium on the mutual recognition of orders freezing assets or evidence. This is in fact the first fundamental proposal to be made since the adoption by the Council and the Commission of the programme of measures to implement the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions in criminal matters. I am also very grateful to the rapporteur, Mr Marinho. His report is excellent and as he has stressed, mutual recognition will be a crucial step forward in judicial cooperation in criminal matters.
As you all know, traditional judicial cooperation is slow and bureaucratic, which runs totally counter to the interests of the public, and the current situation highlights the need for swift and effective judicial cooperation. I also welcome the approach adopted by the rapporteur in his amendments, and in particular the implication that this initiative does not go far enough. It only applies to a very limited list of offences already harmonised at EU level and does not cover certain traditional offences such as murder, armed robbery and rape. Nor does it cover terrorist acts.
The rapporteur accordingly suggests that the provisions of the proposed decision should extend to any offence punishable by means of a custodial sentence or custodial security measure with a maximum duration of at least six months, and the Commission is totally in agreement with this. Furthermore, the Commission is already advocating such an extension to the Council and negotiations are under way. Parliament therefore has a good chance of making this initiative more ambitious, which would reflect the objectives of the Heads of State and Government, who established the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions in criminal matters at the Tampere European Council. Mr President, it is in this spirit that I welcome the adoption of this positive and ambitious report.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament, adjourned on Thursday 20 September 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, and as you can imagine, it is my sad duty to have to open this session of Parliament with the news of several disasters that have claimed the lives of many people. When I have finished reading the statement, I would like to suggest that we observe a minute' s silence to pay tribute to the victims.
On 21 September, Toulouse was struck by a disaster on an unprecedented scale, in which 29 people died and 2500 were injured. We have all been concerned and deeply saddened by the suffering of the victims' families, of the injured and by the grief of the people of Toulouse. Following the explosion at the AZF factory, I sent a message on behalf of Parliament, and on my own behalf, to the Mayor of Toulouse, Mr Douste-Blazy and to his fellow citizens, to express our solidarity and deepest sympathy. The exact causes of this awful disaster are still unknown, but one thing is certain: France, and all the countries of the European Union, must make a firm commitment to ensure that a tragedy like this never happens again. It will be held up as an example of what we must no longer tolerate, wherever similar risks exist. People' s safety must never be compromised due to negligence, passivity or an overriding concern to save money.
In a repeat of previous incidents, this time in Northern Ireland, a journalist, Martin O' Hagan, was murdered on European Union soil by terrorists with a single objective - to spread fear by firstly attacking those who work to inform others. This appalling act is an attack by its perpetrators on the fundamental values of the European Union, namely the right to life, the rule of law and the freedom of expression. Under no circumstances must these acts of terrorism call into question the efforts of all those who, in spite of the difficulties they encounter, are working tirelessly to finally achieve the goals of the peace process.
On 27 September, a mentally disturbed man carried out a horrific attack on the Parliament of the Swiss canton of Zug, tragically killing 14 members of the local Parliament and government and also injuring approximately 10 people. As soon as I heard of these senseless murders, I sent, on behalf of everyone, our most sincere condolences to the authorities and a message of solidarity to the relatives of those killed and wounded.
Earlier this afternoon, we heard the news that a suicide attack was carried out against the Parliament of Kashmir in India, a despicable act in which 22 people have been killed so far and approximately 30 have been injured. The explosion also caused very considerable damage to the area around the Parliament building. We are all distressed and saddened by this attack.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to propose that we pay tribute to the victims of all these attacks by now observing a minute' s silence.
Onesta (Verts/ALE). (FR) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your words of sympathy and solidarity. On the morning of Friday 21 September, I was at home, less than two kilometres from the site of the explosion, and I can tell you that I now know what a tragedy really is. We have, all of us here, seen the images of this explosion on the television. I believe, and I can even be sure, that all my fellow Members from my region, such as Mrs Ainardi, Mrs de Veyrac, Mr Rod, join me in thanking all the Members who have expressed their sympathy and solidarity.
I would also like to show you a damaged and charred metal girder, which I found at the factory site, over a kilometre from where the explosion occurred. Now you can imagine the state of the bodies that were found to the south of Toulouse.
Ladies and gentlemen, having observed a minute' s silence at the beginning of today' s debate, we must now try to restore the confidence of people everywhere who fear these bombs, and, as you have said, Madam President, we must ensure, with the votes we cast this week and by taking bold resolutions, that the disaster that occurred in Toulouse really is the last in a series of already too many incidents of this kind.
Ladies and gentlemen, with your agreement, I would like to propose to give the floor to the Members who have requested to speak. This is an exceptional case - and I do mean exceptional - and is on account of the scale of the recent disasters.
Madam President, what you have just said demonstrates that we must now be especially careful about the public statements we make and it is significant that you have spoken about four disasters: two of which have taken place in or around parliaments - in Switzerland and in Kashmir.
I want to say this because I wish to express my solidarity and that of my group with the statements by the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, the Vice-President of the Commission, Mr Patten, the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Michel, the President of the French Republic, Mr Chirac, and in this case I regret that we have not heard him speak - since he always does so authoritatively, bravely and appropriately - in relation to the unfortunate public remarks of the President of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Italy, Mr Berlusconi, on the supposed superiority of Western civilisation over other civilisations.
I believe it is especially important now for the European Parliament to state strongly once again, that this is not a clash of civilisations, but, rather, that we have to defend values that are shared by all humanity. I therefore believe it is important that we, in the European Parliament, clearly express and demonstrate an approach, which is not just the approach of my group, and in this case I would like to address Mr Poettering to say that I was the first to applaud when, at the special sitting we held on the attacks of 11 September, he expressly cited the speech of Anwar al-Sadat in this Parliament.
I believe that remarks such as those by Mr Berlusconi must be criticised by all of us and I hope, because it is not the first time, that they will not be repeated, since they damage the European cause throughout the world.
Madam President, to continue on the same theme, in the wake of the events of 11 September, Parliament gained a very broad consensus on the need to quash any equation of Islam with terrorism, substantiating the unacceptable and dangerous theory that this is a clash of civilisations.
On the other hand, we recall Mr Solana' s words, spoken in the same spirit, who had advised - and I quote - that we must not create a rift, as this would be a huge mistake. Mr Berlusconi' s astounding and deeply shameful words show how important it is to issue a very clear response. First of all, we must strongly condemn the age-old rumour of the purported superiority of Western civilisation and Christianity. Then, we must decide upon an initiative, along the lines of Article 7 of the Treaty of Nice, enabling the Council to determine that there is a clear risk of a serious breach by a Member State of the fundamental principles of the European Union and to address recommendations to that State.
I therefore suggest, Madam President, that the Conference of Presidents examines what significant political action we would be advised to take in this matter.
I will give the floor straight away to Mrs Roure so that she can give us the opinion of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
Roure (PSE), rapporteur. (FR) Madam President, on 14 November in this very Chamber I tabled a report - which Parliament approved - on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on a French initiative with a view to adopting a Convention on improving mutual assistance in criminal matters.
Today the Council is consulting us once again, this time on a new text of a draft protocol. Following the Extraordinary European Council meeting of 21 September, which was devoted to the fight against terrorism, we are called on to make a decision on this as a matter of urgency. Obviously I understand that current circumstances are impelling the European Union to strengthen cooperation as quickly as possible in the fight against terrorism.
Nevertheless, I should like to make a number of comments. I will start by expressing my regret that the Council did not accept the amendment which we proposed and which sought to extend the non-invocability of professional secrecy to commercial activities and the financial advice activities of lawyers and other members of regulated legal professions. I do actually still believe that this provision is essential to the effectiveness of judicial cooperation to combat money laundering. I also regret the fact that the Council did not reach an agreement on dual criminal liability.
Having said this, I see that the text of the protocol contains much more precise provisions on monitoring banking transactions. I also note with interest that in the future it will be Eurojust which will play a major role in ensuring that the mutual assistance system works smoothly.
Having made these comments, I can of course go along with the Commission and accept that the European Parliament should, in this exceptional case - without a report and in accordance with the urgent procedure - today approve the text which is before it.
The item will be added to Thursday' s voting time.
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the White Paper on Reform of European Governance.
Without further ado I will give the floor to the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, on 4 September, I presented to this House the White Paper on Reform of European Governance. Some Members gave me their immediate reactions then, and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have started to analyse our proposals. Today' s debate is therefore taking place within the context of a wider discussion that is already well under way. I would like to make a few preliminary remarks in order to clear up some misunderstandings that have emerged during this debate - and I will, of course, be happy to reply to any further comments you may wish to make during this morning' s discussion.
As you know, the overriding aim of the White Paper on Reform of European Governance is to renew and reinvigorate the institutional triangle, which operates according to the Community method under the present Treaty. This complements and reinforces the Commission' s and my own ongoing commitment to institutional changes that will strengthen the role of the European Parliament. Indeed, the Commission has always maintained that this House, which directly represents the people of Europe, should play a central role in the institutional triangle, on an equal footing with the Council, representing the Member States, and the Commission, which represents the European public interest.
The Commission also supports the work of the Court of Justice to ensure that the European Union is based on the rule of law and respect for human rights. We have been pursuing this commitment constantly and consistently. It remains our objective to strengthen the legitimacy of this House and thus to consolidate representative democracy.
It was this same desire to consolidate representative democracy and to ensure that it functions correctly and efficiently that inspired our White Paper on Reform of European Governance.
In the past few weeks, a number of people have criticised that part of our proposals that seeks to clarify the distinction between the legislative and executive functions. These criticisms are, it seems to me, the result of a misunderstanding. I have, for example, heard it said that the Commission is asking for a 'blank cheque' so that it can perform its executive tasks without the legitimate scrutiny of Parliament. This is simply not true, as is clear from the White Paper itself. What the Commission is suggesting, in fact, is that Parliament, the Council and the Commission should all take a step backwards and start concentrating once again on their institutional tasks.
The Commission, for its part, should table fewer proposals and target them better, concentrating on its executive function. The Council should play its legislative role and not become an executive. Parliament has primary responsibilities in monitoring the way policies are implemented and with regard to the Community budget. It is thus much more than simply the co-legislator.
The White Paper' s proposals are, therefore, ambitious. Their aim is to ensure that the existing rules are fully applied at last, and to give Parliament an equal role with the Council. This goes far beyond the power to 'call back' responsibility for executive decisions, on which some Members of this House have focused much attention.
The 'call-back' option is too limited, in that it merely allows Parliament to partially change the current system - which, we all know, is seriously deficient - but without making good the deficiencies.
As the White Paper shows, what we really need is a structural change that clarifies who is responsible for putting policy into practice. This is vital if we are to know who is to be held answerable for policy implementation. After all, the principle of accountability is an essential part of the way democratic institutions operate.
The White Paper contends that the Commission should be responsible for implementing policy. It questions the need for the current system of regulatory and management committees. The prospect of enlargement makes it all the more urgent to review our commitology.
However, the paper also states very clearly that the terms and limits of the Commission' s executive role must be laid down in the new legislation that you will discuss on the basis of the Commission' s final proposal. It also states that we need a simple legal mechanism to allow Council and Parliament, on an equal footing, to monitor and control the actions of the Executive. We are already giving thought to how this mechanism might work, but at this stage, before proposing anything, we want to listen.
We are expecting a major contribution from the Member States' advisory committees as well as from this House.
In the White Paper, the Commission has also committed itself to improving its consulting procedures when drawing up policy proposals. Some have suggested that this would undermine the role of Parliament. I sincerely believe this is not the case, and it is certainly not our intention.
Quite clearly, we have never proposed - and we never will propose - that Parliament or other democratically elected institutions be replaced by the voluntary civil associations we call 'non-governmental organisations' .
These associations play an important role in raising public awareness and integrating our society, and we therefore wish to enjoy a useful relationship with them. This relationship, which, I repeat, has absolutely no connection with the role of democratically elected institutions, is, at the moment, unclear and lacking in transparency.
We therefore need to bring some order to current practice. In particular, we need guidelines that make it transparent and more structured than now. We also need guidelines on how to use expert advice in formulating public policies. All this will improve the way in which the Commission exercises its right of initiative.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I have here before me a newspaper interview, from which I should like to read you an extract. It reads 'I do not agree with the Anti-Slavery Conference in Durban. It promotes a sense of victimisation in people who already feel like victims.' It goes on to say: 'I am not happy with the whole Conference in Durban, quite apart from the way in which the Middle East was discussed and the fact that someone like Castro was applauded. These are indicators that this was an anti-western meeting' . These are not my words, but those of a European Commissioner, namely Mr Bolkestein. Last night in my group, our group chairman told me that Mr Nielson, on account of unfortunate statements he made concerning anti-American imperialism, will have to justify himself before the Conference of Presidents. Would it not be fair, therefore, if you, in your capacity as President of the Conference of Presidents, were also to invite Mr Bolkestein, giving him the opportunity to explain before the Conference of Presidents these very unfortunate, extremely dangerous statements at a time when we, as the Western world, must join forces with the Islamic world to combat terrorism.
Mr Staes, I can confirm that Mr Nielson will be attending the Conference of Presidents and we shall consider your suggestion.
Madam President, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Finnish language programmes have been removed from Parliament' s television network. We wondered why that was, but got no explanation for it. There are therefore no programmes being broadcast from Finland, while some Member States can get three or even four channels. Could I request the President to ask those concerned to correct the situation, as it is odd, particularly during these times of crisis, that one Member State' s programme signal should have been removed from the television network without any explanation.
Mr Paasilinna, due to absolutely exceptional circumstances, Mrs Banotti has unfortunately not yet arrived. We shall, of course, inform her of your dissatisfaction and she will immediately find out what can be done.
The Court of First Instance has recently rejected the appeals lodged by Members of the European Parliament, the National Front and the Bonino List against Parliament' s decision of 14 September 1999 not to recognise the existence of the Technical Group of Independent Members. In accordance with the provision of the order, the cases concerned were joined for the purposes of judgment and the appeals were rejected. In each case, the applicants will bear their own costs and the costs of Parliament, including those incurred in the summary proceedings in case 222/99. The judgment was delivered in open session in Luxembourg on 2 October 2001. As a result, the suspensive order handed down by the President of the Court of First Instance on 25 November 1999 at the end of the summary proceedings lapsed when the judgment was delivered, in other words, on 2 October 2001, pursuant to Article 107(3) of the Court' s Rule of Procedure. Therefore, Parliament' s decision of 14 September 1999 not to recognise the existence of the Technical Group of Independent Members is once again fully effective.
I shall of course give the floor to Mr Dell' Alba.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the eighteen MEPs belonging to the Technical Group of Independent Members have taken note of the judgment of the Court of First Instance on 2 October. They point out that this judgment is somehow the inverse image of the order handed down by the President of the same court, who, on 25 November 1999, ruled that Parliament was obliged to recognise the legitimate existence of our group. It stands to reason that we shall be appealing against yesterday' s decision and that, obviously, we ask for an interim order to suspend the effects of the judgment.
In this respect, Madam President, in order to avoid any misunderstandings, I ask you, before making further provisions to consult the Legal Services as to the effects of the suspension, which is what we shall ask the Court to do, as is within our rights.
Having said that, I would like to draw the attention of my fellow Members to two important aspects of yesterday' s judgment. The first aspect is that our appeal is fully admissible and, therefore, MEPs are fully entitled to question the justice of actions of the European Parliament, such as these. This was not what Parliament wished, as it had requested that the Court declare that this appeal should not be admitted.
The second aspect is that, on several occasions, the Court recognises that disparities do exist in the treatment of the Members of the European Parliament. The Court mentions this in Paragraphs 201 and 57 of yesterday' s judgment. I am not going to quote these paragraphs and I will simply say that the Court declared that Parliament must remedy these disparities, as part of its duties to manage internal affairs.
Mr Corbett, since your draft report on the reform of Articles 29 and 30, which aims to rectify these disparities has been held in abeyance for a year, we shall continue our fight, we shall be vigilant and we shall do everything within our power to ensure that we continue this fight to eliminate these disparities and that it does not cease as a result of yesterday' s judgment.
Madam President, I am delighted at the victory of Parliament at the Court of First Instance. It confirms that we were right in the decision that we took. Mr Dell'Alba, though, is also right to draw attention to the fact that we must ensure that there are no disparities or discriminations in our Rules. That was the objective of the report of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs which we held in abeyance pending the judgment of the Court.
Perhaps now is the time for this report to come before the full House, but if there is to be an appeal and if - although I would personally doubt this - the full Court of Justice were to suspend the effects of the decision of the Court of First Instance until they themselves rule, that would put us in a difficult position with the report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs. Personally I doubt that the full Court of Justice would give such an ordinance giving a suspensive effect, in which case we can proceed immediately to look at the disparity that some people may feel exists in our Rules. My report would, I am sure, go some way to reassuring people.
Mr Corbett, what I can say to you and Mr Dell' Alba is that, of course, if there is to be an appeal, I shall examine very closely, in conjunction with Parliament' s Legal Service, whether this appeal will have a suspensive effect. We shall look into this matter extremely carefully.
Madam President, the judgment is very clear, but in a society governed by the rule of law there must, of course, be the right of appeal and the judgment must have no effects until such time as the highest court has reached its conclusion. The judgment is also very clear when it comes to the duties of Parliament. Among the grounds of the judgment, number 157 expressly states that it is Parliament' s duty, within the framework of its relevant internal procedures, to investigate whether the disparities in treatment of the two categories of Members arising from the aforesaid internal procedures are all necessary and, therefore, objectively justified. This is, to speak plainly, a broad hint to us to examine our Rules of Procedure to see whether they are discriminatory.
I think that all MEPs and political units such as the Italian Radical Party must have completely equal opportunities. They must naturally have the same political rights as the political groups, apart from a number of rights quite specific to the latter. However, the rules need to be examined critically to ensure that political units have the same opportunities to work in Parliament. I would therefore call upon you to request the legal services to go through the judgment carefully and see how we are to improve the Rules of Procedure in order to ensure complete equality. I would also call for the judgment to be brought up at the first meeting of the Conference of Presidents to be held directly after such an investigation of the judgment has been carried out. In that context, we shall be able to debate a package of arrangements for independent MEPs and smaller political units which are not large enough to form a group and, in that way, be able to secure the fair treatment of MEPs.
Madam President, I must take this opportunity to inform you that a party of schoolchildren invited by me for this week - tomorrow to be precise - has cancelled the visit. I also heard, however, that mine was not the only group affected, but that around half the invited groups had cancelled their visits this week. The children in question, or their parents, fear that security measures in this House are inadequate and that the children would be in danger if they visited Parliament. Let me request you, then, to supply the public with extensive information about the adequacy of the security arrangements. Should this not be possible, consideration should be given to a general suspension of visits. I myself have also another concern: I would welcome it if those visitors' quotas that cannot be made use of because visits have been cancelled, could be set aside for future dates rather than be lost, so that these groups that, for understandable reasons, are not visiting Parliament now, may make up for it at a later date.
The Bureau members will be meeting this evening and I shall inform them of your proposal.
Mr President, I would like to make a personal statement pursuant to Rule 122, which allows the speaker three minutes. I shall not abuse the Rule.
Yesterday, an Italian news agency reported a letter sent to President Fontaine by Mr Tajani regarding the speeches made during the debate of the Extraordinary Council of 21 September by Mr Barn Crespo and myself. First of all, I would ask you to check and find out whether the President received this letter. In addition, I gather from the agency - because I have not read the letter - that our President is being asked to do something improper, which is to take an initiative in defence of the Italian Parliament. I do not know with what prerogative the President of the European Parliament could do so. I also assume that the Presidents of the Italian Parliament should be perfectly able to defend their own institutions.
I should like to make it clear, then, that neither Mr Barn Crespo nor I made any attack on that Parliament. We did, however, point out what seemed to be extremely inconsistent behaviour on the part of the Italian Government, for, at Brussels, it did not submit any reservation when signing the action plan against terrorism at the close of the Extraordinary Council, nor did it raise any objection of the kind in the Justice and Home Affairs Council, and yet Italy is promoting a law which makes judicial cooperation much more difficult. The latter fact has been noted by prominent jurists, the international press and also, today, by the American judge, Mr Calabresi, head of the Court of Appeal in New York, who says that Italy is setting out in the opposite direction to that taken by the United States and the whole international community.
In any case, we freely expressed an opinion. In the debate, Mr Tajani did the same, refuting these arguments with arguments of his own. At this point, I frankly cannot see what our President should do other than uphold the prerogative of this Parliament, which, pursuant to Rule 2, guarantees the independence of the parliamentary mandate, and as neither I nor Mr Barn Crespo have violated any rule of behaviour laid down in the Rules of Procedure, I think Mrs Fontaine should do nothing. It also seems odd to me that Mr Tajani should complain about alleged interference and then ask the President to do the same. Having said that, I should like you, Mr President, to inform Mrs Fontaine that, before the end of this part-session, we would like to know if and how she intends to respond to Mr Tajani' s letter.
I shall, of course, inform the President of your request. I am sure Mrs Fontaine will respond as soon as possible.
Mr President, a further personal statement. I do not believe Mrs Fontaine needs lessons in parliamentary law to know what to do.
I refer to the letter that I sent to the President yesterday. The agencies are not the source of the information, but rather the text of the letter that I sent to Mrs Fontaine to ask her if she thought it appropriate to intervene following certain statements made in this House by the President of the Socialist Group, Mr Barn Crespo and other members of the same Group. I do not think I mentioned Mrs Napoletano in the letter, but I do not mind contesting some of her statements.
The problem is not one of interference of the European Parliament in the Italian Parliament; it is that yesterday and the day before, that is since the beginning of this part-session, we have heard statements repeated in this House that interfere with the Italian Parliament. Indeed, when someone asks repeatedly to check whether the laws that are passed are in accordance with the decisions of the Council of Ministers, and nobody questions the assessment of that Council, I repeat and continue to repeat, and I said so yesterday to Mrs Napoletano and the Socialist Group, who had spoken on an issue that concerns Italy' s internal affairs - the Italian Parliament, thank God, is still sovereign and must not be subjected to guardianship - that, in connection with the rules on international letters rogatory, the issue in question is about a verification of a law ratifying the agreement between Italy and Switzerland, and the basic law is that which implements Article 3 of the European Convention on Legal Assistance signed in Strasbourg by all the European countries and which has been in force in Italy since 1961. Article 3 lays down the obligation of the country that receives a letter rogatory asking for legal assistance to send the petitioning country the originals of the documents having evidential value or, failing that, a copy with a certificate of authenticity. This is not a matter of failing to combat terrorism: we have always been, as a political grouping and as the national government, the expression of this political movement with its Prime Minister strongly committed to fighting terrorism. I would not like it to be said, wrongly, in this House, that the law being adopted implementing Article 3 of the European Convention on Legal Assistance, which has all too often been violated by magistrates in Italy, is actually a law favouring terrorism, because it is not. Hence my request for Mrs Fontaine' s intervention, if she thinks fit.
The next item is the report (A5-0313/2001) by Mrs Gonzlez lvarez, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety [3644/2001 - C5-0298/2001 - 2000/0073(COD)].
Mr President, I do not think I will take up the whole five minutes.
This is a third reading and it is a conciliation procedure that we have been following for a long time. I would like to welcome the dialogue that has existed between the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament, which has been very helpful. Naturally, the result of a conciliation is never entirely good for all parties. It is usually fairly good, but with a few drawbacks.
I believe that of the first amendments presented by the European Parliament at first reading, the other two institutions have accepted some important amendments. For example, taking into account in product safety not only the producers' liability but also that of the distributors; clear information on the possible risks in the languages of the different States of the Union; faster exchange of information; greater cooperation between Member States to prevent dangerous products from reaching the market; and also, the withdrawal of products which are considered dangerous, even if they are already being marketed. Furthermore, although not in the form that our colleagues from the United Kingdom wanted, an amendment aimed at including the special nature of several charities in the United Kingdom was accepted. I believe that a major part of the European Parliament' s proposals were included.
However, not all of them were included, and at second reading we presented only seven amendments which intended to include what had not been accepted by the other institutions. These amendments referred to something very important for us: the inclusion of the services in a proposal on which the Commission is working, the results of which it is committed to producing in 2003. I believe this is a very important proposal for us, because safety of services should rank on the same level as the directive we are reviewing today.
We also need to take account of the precautionary principle; this means that when there is a well-founded suspicion that a product is not safe, we should apply this principle of precaution which people talk so much about and which is seldom applied in reality. And the possibility that there is an external certificate which supplements the official certification. There is also an agreement on comitology which in this case is not what Parliament wanted either, but there is a proposal of continued and regular information to the European Parliament and the Council.
Some matters which caused us concern in the final proposal were also clearly accepted.
I would just like to emphasise a matter proposed by the Commission itself at the beginning, which is the ban on exports to Third World countries of products which are not considered safe in Europe. This proposal was not accepted by Parliament by a few votes, and is naturally not included in the final document. I have to say, as rapporteur, that this is perhaps what concerns me most. I believe that we run a real risk that, as we are seeing daily, unscrupulous people export to Third World countries products that are not safe. This is an issue that is of enormous concern to me. We have the verbal undertaking of the European Commission that there will be very strict controls to ensure that this does not occur, but it would have been safer for it to be included in the proposal and for there to be no risk of exporting products which we Europeans consider dangerous to Third World countries.
Therefore, Mr President, despite the rapporteur' s great regret that the express ban on the export of unsafe products to the Third World has not been included in the directive, I believe, as I said in the beginning, that it is not the best proposal for the Council and the Commission, perhaps it is not the best one for Parliament either, but it is the result of a conciliation procedure in which a very fruitful dialogue has indeed taken place between all the institutions and with which I am very satisfied.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the operation of the internal market is only guaranteed if, in an area without internal borders, appropriate and sensible measures are put in place and consumer safety is safeguarded. We need uniform safety standards, not a range of different standards. The proposal before us is intended to create these uniform standards. In recent years, consumer confidence has been badly dented, firstly by various acts of fraud against consumers, and secondly by the very welcome research in this area. This has repeatedly revealed that some consumer goods on the market no longer complied with current safety criteria. It is therefore even more important and necessary that this report is before us today. Our thanks are due to the rapporteur, whose efforts have made this possible.
It is very important that this general product safety directive should apply irrespective of the type of marketing undertaken, and that a decision is taken which reflects developments in the market place and therefore also includes distance marketing and electronic commerce.
As regards the issue of consumer safety, the task is not only to protect children and older persons as the weaker groups in our societies, which is always emphasised; safety standards must apply to everyone. It is therefore only right and proper that we should seek to ensure that goods which no longer meet our safety standards and have to be withdrawn from sale do not end up by circuitous routes in third countries where they could pose a risk to health.
I think that one of the most important points arising in this context is the involvement of the trade. Ensuring compliance with these current safety criteria cannot take place solely via the public authorities; the dealers themselves must play their part in ensuring that this relationship of trust between dealer and consumer is enhanced and improved in future. However, this will still require appropriate controls, and the directive is only as good as its regulation. Monitoring measures will therefore be very important. This network of regulatory bodies in the Member States is essential, and we hope that it will come into operation as quickly as possible.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 4 October 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you will recall, on 8 October, 104 passengers and four employees of Linate airport were killed in a tragic accident involving a small private aircraft and an SAS aeroplane, which was due to fly from Milan to Copenhagen.
Immediately after the disaster, I sent a message expressing my condolences to the President of the Italian Council and to the Danish Prime Minister. Since I was on an official visit to Denmark the day after the accident occurred, I also gave the same message in person to the various authorities that I met during my visit. I would, however, like to publicly demonstrate, once again, our solidarity and deep sympathy for the families of the victims.
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
Relating to Tuesday President. I would like to inform you we shall have the election of a vice-president to replace Mr Wiebenga. The election will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon. I would reiterate that the deadline for nominations is 6 p.m. this evening.
Pursuant to Rule 62(5) of the Rules of Procedure, 95 Members have opposed the application of the procedure to delegate the power of decision to a committee for the Corbey report on packaging and packaging waste, currently scheduled to be taken at voting time on Tuesday at 12 noon. This report will therefore be placed on the agenda of the next part-session in accordance with the normal procedure.
Madam President, I am rapporteur for the subject of Macedonia which is on tomorrow' s agenda. However, the Commission has just informed us that this subject should be withdrawn. As rapporteur, and also on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I propose that, in accordance with Article 144 of the Rules of Procedure, we delete this subject from tomorrow' s agenda. The reason for this is that we have obtained information to the effect that the Commission wishes firstly to contribute more money by way of aid to Macedonia and secondly to extend the period of aid.
I therefore propose that we withdraw the subject from this part-session and instead address it in the November part-session. We therefore refer the subject back to the Committee on Budgets and to the committees which are to issue opinions on this subject, that is to say the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
Of course, Mr Frm, I can confirm these details. The Commission is currently preparing a revised proposal in order to take into account the additional requirements for financial resources requested by the International Monetary Fund.
Are there any objections to the proposal that Mr Frm has just made, who also supports the Commission proposal?
President. Pursuant to Rule 114, 37 Members have opposed the application of the procedure without report to the proposal for a Council decision on admitting the European Community to the Codex Alimentarius Committee, currently scheduled to be taken at voting time on Tuesday at 12 noon.
This proposal for a decision is therefore referred back to the committee responsible for reconsideration.
Madam President, there is an urgent matter missing from the agenda to which I would briefly like to draw the attention of the Presidency and the Members. The German foundation 'Memory, Responsibility and Future' , established by the German government and national enterprises, has taken the surprising, disturbing decision not to count Italian prisoners of war or even a large percentage of Italian civilian forced labourers among the former forced labourers in Germany, providing compensation only for civilians who were interned in actual concentration camps. This exclusion is unjustified from a legal point of view and would hinder the deep reconciliation between the European peoples who were divided by the tragic experiences of the Second World War. I feel that action needs to be taken to prevent this great discrimination in the German compensation against Italian prisoners of war and Italian civilian forced labourers.
We shall of course take note of what you have said.
Madam President, this morning, when I got up, I found that I had lost my voice. I have lost my voice and so I do not know whether I will be able to deliver my usual explanations of vote tomorrow. That aside, I am here beside my friend, Mr Borghezio, not because I have changed group but because I support his proposal regarding the failure to provide compensation for Italian former prisoners of war and Italian civilian forced labourers. These are all people who are over 75 years of age, and therefore pensioners, who have been left by the Italian government without a pension. Therefore, the damages suffered by these Italian citizens, who, like many of us, have suffered the outrages of war, are even greater because, in addition to not receiving this compensation, they are pensioners who do not receive a pension.
Mr President, colleagues will have read in some of this morning's newspapers about the refusal of the Republic of France to recognise the extraterritorial status of the European Parliament. Apparently, the French government has refused to issue a visa to the President of the Republic of China to allow him to come to Parliament for a meeting. This is a denial of our status as a supranational Parliament, and I hope that you will be protesting to the French government about the fact that Mr Chen has not been allowed a visa. . .
- . . . and insisting that we, in the European Union, should be recognising a country which has existed as a flourishing parliamentary democracy for some 14 years and the status it must have in a world in which democracies must work together.
I have taken note of what you have said. The President will, of course, be duly informed.
Lagendijk (Verts/ALE). (NL) Mr President, this matter was discussed last week in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy. We do not think it is a good idea to approve the request for urgent debate for a variety of reasons: it appears to be a technical matter, but in our view, it is an entirely political decision which requires thorough preparation in this Parliament.
Two issues are involved. First of all, the future of EU aid in the Balkans. Will this now be provided via an agency or via delegations? There is a great deal of confusion about this. That is why the Commission has asked the Commissioner responsible, Mr Patten, to visit the committee next week and to discuss this matter with the committee.
Secondly, this proposal has caused quite a bit of unrest in Macedonia. It seems appropriate to us to take the time to discuss this matter further with the Macedonian authorities before the Council takes a decision.
Finally, the committee is able to approve a report as soon as next week, as a result of which it will be possible to vote on it in the next part-session in November. All the more reason, therefore, not to approve the request for urgent debate.
Proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community position within the Ministerial Conference set up by the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation on the accession of the People's Republic of China to the World Trade Organisation
Mr President, I recommend that urgent procedure be applied to this document because it would also make it easier for China to take part in the forthcoming meeting in Doha.
Proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community position within the Ministerial Conference set up by the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation on the accession of the separate customs territory of Chinese Taipei (Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu) to the World Trade Organisation
Mr President, the same argument in favour of urgent procedure applies in this case as applied to the previous matter, namely, that Taiwan too should be able to take part in the meeting in Doha.
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0319/2001), on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council decision on Community incentive measures in the field of employment [8432/1/2001 - C5-0294/2001 - 2000/0195(COD)] (Rapporteur: Mrs Jensen).
Madam Commissioner, the EU' s employment policy is one of open cooperation in which the Member States set common goals, exchange experiences and evaluate each other' s results and employment policies. It is an open process in which the individual country itself chooses which funds it will use in order to achieve the common goals. We, in Parliament, should also like to see the process become more open by involving and engaging the general public more. The report we are debating today is about the implementation of Article 129 of the Treaty of Amsterdam concerning employment policy incentives. It is about appropriations to the work on employment policy over the next five years and about money for analyses, statistics, conferences and reports etc. Employment policy is to be evaluated in 2003. It will be the first open coordination to be evaluated, and the money for employment policy is also to be used for this evaluation.
At Parliament' s first reading, we adopted 17 amendments to the Commission' s proposal, covering the following themes. We should like to see the social partners and local and regional authorities more involved in the process, and we should like to see greater focus placed upon the ways in which information and employment policy affects a broader public. We should like to see more focus on the equal treatment of women in employment policy; we should like to receive some further proposals concerning Parliament' s involvement; and we should like to look at the connection with other Community activities. Last but not least, we should like to see pilot projects to increase information about employment policy at local and regional levels and help develop relevant strategies. As a result, Parliament proposed an increase in the budget.
Madam President, I want to raise an issue on the floor of the House which I am sure will be welcomed. I do so as the Labour Party spokesperson on Northern Ireland. The House would surely like to welcome the news on the peace process in Northern Ireland and the decommissioning of weapons. It serves as an example of what can be achieved through peaceful negotiation.
Tribute must be given to those involved in the difficult times of the peace process and the ongoing negotiations. Mention must be made at the determination of those involved, including David Trimble, and not least a Member of this House, John Hume, who has fought for peace for over three decades.
Mr Cashman, I am even more pleased to hear this good news because I was on an official visit to Ireland last week, and, naturally, we were all waiting for this announcement. Thank you for your comments.
Madam President, as you were informed earlier this week, I was in Scotland protesting against the Trident nuclear submarine base there and I was arrested. What is the situation concerning our immunity in other Member States? I understood that we could not be arrested in such circumstances.
I have nothing against the Scottish Police. They were extremely courteous. They were aware of the concept of peaceful demonstration. Maybe they should train the police in places like Genoa and show them how to react to peaceful protests.
What is the situation regarding our immunity? I was not breaking the peace, but trying to keep the peace by helping to rid the world of nuclear weapons. Secondly, in relation to my immunity: Does that not count when I am in another country?
Mrs McKenna, I had, of course, been informed of the situation that you were in and I am pleased to see that you are back with us. We shall thoroughly examine the issue regarding protocol. I shall of course take the appropriate steps to ensure that Members are properly protected, if this is necessary.
Madam President, after that intervention inspired by naked self-interest, may I come back to more important matters of the day. I would like to support my colleague, Mr Cashman, and in particular point out that this Parliament has been a very active supporter of the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland. It has been a long, and at times faltering, road to achieving peace and no one knows that better than our own Nobel Peace Prizewinner, John Hume.
I grew up in Northern Ireland in the shadow of violence, terrorism and intimidation. We are now witnessing another milestone in the return to peace for future generations. May I ask you therefore to write on behalf of the European Parliament to all those involved and congratulate them on this major initiative? I would also hope that the Belgium presidency would do the same on behalf of the Council for the 15 Member States.
Mrs McCarthy, I shall certainly do what you ask. I can tell you that all those I met were more than aware of the European Parliament' s long-standing contribution to the peace process in Northern Ireland.
Madam President, I do not wish to delay proceedings, but just to follow up on the point, which has been made on a number of occasions, about parliamentary immunity. I could be wrong, but my understanding is that the purpose of parliamentary immunity for Members of Parliament acting in the Parliament - not outside the Parliament - is to allow you to represent the people who elected you. It is not so that you can necessarily represent your own views in whatever manner you choose. In other words, when you are outside this House, you are just the same as anyone else. You are on your own.
Mr Beazley, questions of immunity are always very delicate, as you know, and Mr Duff has been appointed to draft a report on the issue. I suggest that he also take account of all the very interesting points that you have both brought up, so that the document written on this is as comprehensive as possible. I would like to thank Mr Duff for doing this.
Madam President, as an Italian, I would like to thank Mrs McKenna for urging the Italian police to follow the example of the Scottish police. I would also like to express my sorrow at her unfortunate experience and my appreciation of her commitment to social concerns. I would like to thank her on behalf of the Italian police, which, however, I feel is no worse than any other police force in Europe. In all probability, the Scottish police were polite and courteous because, if one police force should imitate another, it may be that protesters should imitate other protesters too. What I mean is the Scottish police were polite and courteous because the protesters who were with Mrs McKenna did not follow the example of the protesters in Genoa.
The next item is the European Council report and the Commission statement on the meeting of 19 October 2001 in Ghent.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, honourable Members of the European Parliament, true to tradition, I have come here today, a few days after the meeting of the European Council in Ghent, to report on the discussions we held there. And rest assured: I shall be brief and to the point.
This European Council in Ghent was, in fact, already the second meeting under Belgian Presidency, and was, like the previous meeting on 21 September in Brussels, overshadowed by the effects of the attacks in New York and Washington. That was, of course, to be expected.
Madam President, I should like to put a point of order before Parliament today, at a time when we are about to vote on the most important act we are called upon to approve, that is, the budget. Nine people died yesterday in the St Gotthard tunnel because of a road accident. This places a greater onus on us when - under the heading of 'infrastructure' - we come to vote on the much-needed and now ever more pressing engineering works which must be Europe' s response to the problem of traffic across the Alpine passes.
Today we shall be debating the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel, with all the economic and environmental problems that involves. Let us also remind ourselves of this: the incident in the St Gotthard tunnel was caused to a great extent by the additional volumes traffic that the St Gotthard, Brenner and other Alpine passes have had to absorb as a result of the closure of the Mont Blanc tunnel. We must therefore vote with conviction for the infrastructure funding to speed up the procedure involved in rebuilding the Brenner rail tunnel and the Frjus rail tunnel, and move road vehicles onto trains, with benefits for the safety of those who travel and also for the surrounding environment. Let us remember that when we vote.
Madam President, I should like to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 192. The old text reads as follows - it is very short: "And furthermore research projects making use of primates are also excluded." I would like to change that to: "Financing of research projects making use of primates is suppressed within two years, unless it is proved that alternatives are not available." If this amendment can be adopted, it can be combined with 372. Then we will have a sound text. I have agreed this with Mrs Buitenweg.
(With more than twelve Members standing, the oral amendment was not considered) Following the vote
Madam President, there has just been some enthusiastic applause because this vote has ended. I can understand why, as this is always a protracted event. However, I would like to ask you to put one other amendment to the vote. I should have said this at the beginning, but we were already proceeding with the voting. It is about the Court of Auditors. We have now voted on an amount of 1 million in the line to build an extension for the Court of Auditors. As the Committee on Budgets, we would like to ask for another EUR 6 million to be entered in the reserve so that additional capital can be injected during the coming year. This will ultimately produce considerable savings for the taxpayer and will also create extra scope in future budgets. I would also like to ask you to put this last amendment to the vote, which entails entering a further EUR 6 million in the reserve in budget line 206.
Report (A5-0330/2001) by Mr Costa Neves, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 (C5-0300/2001 - 2000/2324(BUD)) and Letter of amendment No 1/2002 (12733/2001 - C5-0495/2001) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 (Section III - Commission)
Madam President, the vote has now been taken, but during the vote on the budget, we spoke against this idea and, as a result, this item was removed from the budget. We are now voting in favour of this paragraph, which is not how we voted on the budget. There is, therefore, a contradiction now, of which the House must be aware. The fact is, however, that the vote has been taken.
Report (A5-0329/2001) by Mrs Buitenweg, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 (C5-0300/2001 - 2000/2325(BUD)) and Letter of amendment No 1/2002 (12733/2001 - C5-0495/2001) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 25 October 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, since our last session, Spain has once again, unfortunately, been cruelly struck by terrorism. On 7 November, Jos Mara Lidn Corbi, a judge and professor of law in the Basque region, was murdered in a cowardly attack whilst leaving his home in Getxo.
The previous day in Madrid, terrorists set off a car bomb, in which a hundred or so people were injured.
On my own behalf, and on that of the European Parliament, I immediately sent my deepest condolences to the victim' s family and our best wishes for a speedy recovery to everyone who was injured in this attack.
Yet again, ETA terrorists have shown that they deny the right to life, that they reject the very principle of the rule of law. By attacking a judge this time, the terrorists are demonstrating this once more.
Yesterday, Algeria was struck by catastrophic weather conditions, which so far have claimed 538 lives and left 316 injured.
I immediately expressed our deep sorrow to the Algerian people for the disaster that has struck Algiers, and our total solidarity for the human tragedy that the country is suffering. I also asked President Bouteflika to pass on a message on our behalf to express our deepest sympathy to the victims' families and loved-ones. I hope very much that the European Union will play an active part in supplying emergency aid, which must be sent as soon as possible.
Yesterday, three journalists were killed in an ambush by the Taliban in Afghanistan. Johanne Sutton, Pierre Billaud and Volker Handloik died whilst carrying out their profession, which was also their passion. It was because of their courage that each of us was able to keep abreast of the events in Afghanistan. I would like to pay homage to them and to express our deepest sympathy for their families and colleagues.
This afternoon, less than an hour ago, an American aircraft crashed not far from JFK airport in the Queens area of New York. There were more than 260 passengers and crew members on board. For the time being, we do not know the exact number of casualties or the precise circumstances surrounding this tragedy. Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to ask you to observe a minute' s silence to pay homage to all the victims.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly pleased to welcome back to the House Olivier Dupuis, who was detained for 14 days in Laos.
I would like to thank all those who helped to bring about this fortunate outcome. I, myself, took several diplomatic steps, and was at pains to stress to both the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Michel, and Mr Javier Solana that it is unacceptable for a country, which signed cooperation agreements with the European Union on 29 April 1997, to detain a Member of the European Parliament, along with three other EU citizens and a Russian national, for a 14-day period, with total disregard for human rights and the obligations arising from the cooperation agreement. I strongly urge the Laotian authorities to respect the democratic principles to which they ascribed, and to bring about the unconditional release of all prisoners detained because of their beliefs.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would like to thank Mr Zimeray who travelled to Vientiane as soon as we had the opportunity to contact him, which was 10 days after we were imprisoned. He immediately offered to act in our defence, and informed us of the diplomatic steps that you had promptly taken. He also told us what many of our fellow Members had done to help us, particularly Mr Brok and our colleagues and friends in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and many other Members as well.
Madam President, I would like to give my sincere thanks to you and all the Members, such as Ignacio Salafranca, Jules Maaten and many others. I think that we should pursue this initiative and I see that this issue is also on the agenda of this session. The situation in Laos is tragic. I would like to reiterate to all my fellow Members that we were in Laos to fight the cause of five lost prisoners, known as the desaparecidos, but there are hundreds of other prisoners and the prison conditions in Laos are terrible. These people do not even have the right to a fair trial, they are passing their final days in oblivion without even being able to see their family. Unfortunately, this situation is nothing out of the ordinary.
Corruption is endemic in Laos. I hope that we will have the opportunity to work together in order to change this situation as quickly as possible.
Madam President, immediately following the vote on the 2002 Budget I asked how exactly Budget line B3-306 had been voted on. My group's co-ordinator and I wrote you a letter asking for the vote to be re-scrutinised. We have as yet received no reply. I therefore wish to lodge an objection to the Minutes on this point in order to get the matter properly clarified.
The background to this is that we had voted on a reserve - the amounts involved and the explanations of them. It was intended that we would vote on them together, with a separate vote only on one short passage in the explanations. Then, though, there were suddenly separate votes on the amounts and the explanations. That was not how it had been intended. I therefore ask that this be looked into, and wish to put on record my reservations about the Minutes.
The next item is the vote on requests for urgent procedure pursuant to Rule 112.
Proposal for a Council regulation aiming to promote the conversion of vessels and fishermen that were, up to 1999, dependent on the fishing agreement with Maroc [COM(2001) 384 - C5-0407/2001 - 2001/0163 (CNS)]
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, last night the Committee on Fisheries approved the report by our colleague, Mrs Migulez Ramos, on the restructuring of the Community fisheries sector affected by the non-renewal of the fisheries agreement with Morocco.
I would like to say to the House that this report is restricted to regulating the technical aspects relating to the social measures aimed at the many people affected; it is a very sensitive issue from a social, and therefore political, point of view, in the Member States affected by this restructuring.
Therefore, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am in a position to ask the House to vote in favour of this request for an urgent procedure presented by the Council, so that this proposal can be debated in Council by the Fisheries Ministers at their meeting called for the 27 November.
Mr President, the Committee on Budgets is sympathetic to the needs of our friends in the Committee on Fisheries. However, a conciliation meeting will be taking place on 21 November and it is not yet agreed between the different institutions how the agreement will be finalised, or indeed in what category it will be finalised. In the light of a decision by the Budgets Council last week, there is a great deal of confusion on our side as to how we are going to deal with this. I would ask that we do not treat this as urgent and that it be held over until after the conciliation meeting of 21 November.
Mr President, I wish to support Mr Wynn. I am glad to see that the Committee on Budgets is taking a responsible approach to this issue because the idea of pushing it through as urgent procedure without debate is unacceptable. We have to be very careful about how we use European taxpayers' money and we need to look to the future. A number of years ago in this Parliament it was already being said that Morocco would not agree to another agreement with the EU. We knew that then and we should have prepared for it.
This situation is not unique, it is going to happen again. At the moment we are discussing a major agreement with Mauritania. The day will come when Mauritania will say to the EU that it no longer wants such an agreement. What are we going to do then? We really need to address this issue, firstly, in relation to how we arrange our common fisheries policy and, secondly, in relation to how we use public money. The way this has been rushed through is unacceptable.
This is not a matter for urgent procedure because we have known for many years that this problem was coming. We need to be extremely careful about how we use European taxpayers' money. I understand the problems the fishing community has, but we need to be more responsible.
Mr President, I would simply like to say that the Committee on Budgets has taken no decision in this field. There are plenty of Members, particularly from my group, in the Committee on Budgets who believe that the urgent procedure is perfectly appropriate. We understand the reasons that the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has been able to give. We believe that, in this case, a legal basis is necessary and, in any event, from the budgetary point of view, if it is necessary to amend that basis as a result of the negotiation with the Council on the 21 November, it could be done without any problem.
I therefore do not believe that this Parliament' s position would be damaged by accepting the urgent procedure today and voting on the Migulez Ramos report, which, furthermore, relates much more to the technical issues in the Commission' s proposal with regard to the restructuring of the fleet than to actual budgetary motivations, which will be the subject of another report.
Mr President, the situation is well known. It has not been possible to renew the fishing agreement with Morocco, so the fishing sector in Spain and to some extent in Portugal is now in a difficult position. The Commission has also responded to the Council's request with the proposal for a restructuring programme, and I can tell you once again that we are not talking about the fishing agreement with Mauritania, but about a restructuring programme for the Spanish fleet and also for a part of the Portuguese fleet. We are talking about paying scrapping premiums. We are talking about social measures. I think it is right for us to say that we will separate the budgetary issue from the legal basis, but the Commission is asking for the legal basis for this restructuring programme to be dealt with quickly. That is why we support the request for urgent procedure.
Proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on the European Community contribution to the "Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria"
Mr President, I oppose urgency on a matter of principle, not on a matter of substance. I am sure we all support a global health fund and President Prodi guaranteed EUR 120 million at the G8 meeting in July. However, I and many others are extremely disappointed that the Commission has taken until November to come forward with any effective suggestions and now it is asking for urgency, effectively denying the Council and Parliament any time to debate or amend this proposal. It looks as if we are just going to hand over a cheque and that will be the end of it.
The Commission is also suggesting the funding should be found by taking EUR 60 million from a fishing agreement and EUR 60 million from the EDF. In its resolution in this House on 25 October this House emphasised that contributions should be new and additional funding, and this is not so. At the moment it looks as if it is a one-off payment.
I would like to hear the Commission guarantee that a legal base will be found for the sustainable funding of the global health fund after 2000 and submitted as quickly as possible. I would like an assurance that it will be new money and that Parliament and the Council will be kept fully informed and involved, so that we play a legislative part in this process. We, as parliamentarians, cannot be treated in this way.
Mr President, there is no point in talking about old money or new money when there is no money!
If we do not get agreement on this matter this year with urgent procedure, there will be no money next year for the Global Health Fund. I know there are problems about getting EUR 60 million from the EDF but, quite frankly, that is another argument. If we want EUR 60 million from the general budget, we have to agree to using urgent procedure on this or there will be no money for the Global Health Fund.
Mr President, I have two observations with regard to the Minutes.
The first is the least important: on the first point, with regard to the votes on request for urgent procedure, the first point voted on was on the fisheries agreement with Morocco. I was here and voted in favour, but this has not been recorded in the Minutes. I was here, and I spoke immediately afterwards.
I would now like to refer to the second point. With regard to the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, yesterday morning a deadline for tabling amendments was set for 10.00 a.m. this morning, in order that the debate may be held tonight, probably at the last minute. The political groups were working yesterday in order to be able to table amendments, and today I see in the Minutes that the item has been added to the agenda of Wednesday 28 November and that the deadline for tabling amendments has been set for Thursday 22 November.
I would like to point out, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, that we cannot work upon the text submitted by the Commission, that we were working on yesterday. There is only one version available in one language, and, in addition to this, in this language there are different versions of the same text with various discrepancies between them.
Lastly, to give just one example, and I shall finish on this note, Mr President, it states that the Commission is proposing a single contribution of 120 million, yet it does not state whether these are euros, dollars, condoms or DDT. I think that the Commission should provide a text that is correct, tell us which of the texts is the final version, and make this available in all of the official languages.
Regarding the question of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, the documents are not ready, as you correctly say. That was the reason why it was put back to 28 November. That will also give the committee some more time to deliberate on the matter and make sure that the text is correct. That was the basis for the reasoning and you are quite right to raise it.
Mr President, as someone who has consistently called in this House for an early report from the presidency on the progress of our own staff reforms, can I be the first to welcome the fact that we received a letter from the President yesterday on this subject. It was an undated letter but I assume it was issued yesterday. However, I should like to register again my concern that we still need more information. Mrs Fontaine says in her letter: "I believe the time has come to provide all Members with the fullest possible details". I am afraid this is not the "fullest possible details", since half of it is a letter to Mr Prodi.
I should like you to ask the Bureau and the presidency to give us in this House, as soon as possible, a comparison of the proposed personnel reforms in this parliamentary institution with the reforms proposed in the Commission. And bearing in mind that on 28 October the Commission adopted their new personnel strategy, can we please have an early debate in this House with Mr Kinnock about his reforms and with the presidency about their reforms, so that Members can be properly informed. We must have a chance to debate this and to understand why the presidency of this House is proposing in one instance radically different changes to those proposed for the Commission. I, along with many other colleagues, am concerned about that different approach.
Mr Harbour, your point is well made and well understood by the Bureau. The House is sovereign at the end of the day. I will certainly pass on your message in the strongest possible terms to the presidency, so that the matter can be resolved. I am sure everybody is aware that there is an ongoing discussion within the Commission itself at the present time. Until the overall situation is clarified Parliament cannot come to any firm conclusions itself.
I do not have the letter in front of me, but in it the President has pointed out that the Conference of Presidents and the Bureau were fairly unanimous in the point of view they have adopted. Parliament is sovereign, as I have said, and the matter will be open for further discussion. There is no doubt about that.
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:
(A5-0376/2001) by Grard Caudron, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the multiannual framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Community for research, technological development and demonstration activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area [COM(2001) 94 - C5-0087/2001 - 2001/0053(COD)];
(A5-0355/2001) by Grard Caudron, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the multiannual framework programme 2002-2006 of the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) for research and training activities aimed at contributing towards the creation of the European Research Area [COM(2001) 94 - C5-0171/2001 - 2001/0054(CNS)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, before I begin my speech as general rapporteur for the Sixth Framework Programme on Research, I must first express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who have helped me in this difficult task. As you know, this is an important programme. It has a provisional budget of EUR 17.5 billion, including Euratom. I would like to thank the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies, the European Commission, Commissioner Busquin, Mr Westendorp, the Secretariat of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the ITER Committee, the administrators of the different groups, my assistant Galle Le Bouler, the shadow rapporteurs of the ITER Committee, the draftsmen of the opinion, the shadow draftsmen of the committees consulted and the group coordinators.
I think that I am now in a position to declare that together we have completed a truly remarkable task. I am sure you will all agree with me on this. You will express your view when we vote. I am sure that the result will not be the same as the outcomes of the votes on the Fourth, and especially the Fifth Framework Programme on Research and Development.
I believe that the results of our work can largely be attributed to two guiding principles. Firstly, in my capacity as rapporteur I have always wanted to be the representative and spokesman for a broad majority in Parliament. In addition, Commissioner Busquin was, from the start, willing to support the framework and the overall budget of the project. In addition to this support, we have received many proposals for adjustment. These have resulted from our wide-ranging consultation with the European research sector, European politicians and all the organisations and citizens with an interest in the European research sector.
I can personally list more than 250 meetings, talks and discussions on this project and this report since the beginning of 2001. Furthermore, I have tried to ensure transparency during work on this project. I have published all available information and views on the subject in real time on my website. In recent months, this website has been visited more than 3 000 times per month, excluding the summer holiday period.
Clearly, all of us, myself included, have agreed to set up a genuine European Research Area and all the necessary structures, including the Joint Research Centre, on the basis of the Framework Programme on Research and Development. We have agreed too that we need to act upon the idea of European added value, as proposed by the European Commission. But, at the same time, we have all declared that we should take into consideration another aspect of added value: the added value of giving research a European dimension. This supplements the accounting added value of the European Commission. As I have already said, we should not allow there to be any perception or feelings of exclusion, and we should back researchers who believe that their work needs to be carried out at a European level.
Madam President, I had not managed to reach my seat. I wanted to make a very brief comment: my name does not appear on the attendance register and I wanted to say that I was present at both the sitting and the corresponding vote. I know that this relates to Monday's sitting, but I did want to have it included in the Minutes. Many thanks. Obviously I did not sign in, but I was here and I did take part. Thank you!
Madam President, before the debate begins, I just want to pass on the feelings of the people in Ireland regarding the future of our national airline Aer Lingus. Prior to the terrorism in New York, it was a star performer in the airline industry, carrying 1.1 million passengers. It is a great provider to our national economy. There is a great wish that it not be regarded as the government giving national aid to keep this flying.
That is not really a comment about the Minutes, and besides, there is going to be a debate on that subject.
Madam President, I just wanted to bring to your attention the arrest in Greece a week ago of twelve British subjects and two Dutch subjects. Among the British subjects were two of my constituents, Paul and Lesley Coppin from Mildenhall in Suffolk. They have been arrested by the Greek authorities on charges of espionage. These people are plane spotters, aviation enthusiasts, on holiday in Greece. It does seem to me rather extraordinary that they are still being held in custody in a fellow Member State, and I wonder if there is something that you can do to bring this matter to the attention of the Greek authorities in order they be released as soon as possible.
Mr Van Orden, we have taken note of your comments and we shall take whatever action is appropriate.
Economic and employment situation in the air transport sector and in the industrial and related services sectors
The next item calls for statements by the Council and the Commission on the economic and employment situation in the air transport sector and in the industrial and related services sectors.
Mrs Durant will now speak on behalf of the Council.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the American Airlines plane crash in New York on Monday 12 November has, of course, reminded everyone of the difficult and dreadful plight of the air transport sector. There is a risk that this latest accident will worsen still further the economic and social crisis that the sector has been facing since 11 September. However, this should not make us forget the roots of this crisis, which is the result, not only of the combination of economic problems directly linked to the attacks on 11 September, but also of previous structural difficulties which were revealed and aggravated by the events of 11 September.
As President of the Council of Transport Ministers and a Belgian Federal Minister, I am particularly concerned about this situation. It seems to me more than ever vital to implement structural, economic and social reforms so as to enable the sector to overcome the current crisis, to give it a boost in the form of social measures, and to lay the foundations of sustainable development in this sector in the long term. In order to do this, we must understand the real roots of the problem and identify the obstacles that must be removed, and I should like to make a start on that here and now, with you and with Mrs Diamantopoulou.
The main cause of the fragility endemic in the European air transport sector is its over-fragmentation, along with a lack of both consolidation at Community level and strategic alliances. Up to now, the Community structure has been based on the desire to create a single market in which optimum conditions for competition are guaranteed. The extreme competition that results from this, in a sector where marginal costs are relatively low, gives rise to problems of over-capacity and at the same time prices that are too low in relation to the average costs borne by the airlines. This particularly fierce competition has therefore helped to make the airlines more fragile, and so they are vulnerable to any economic upset because their margins are so small.
The American air transport industry has for a long time been much more concentrated than its European counterpart, which together with other factors has helped it to cope, for better or worse, with the crisis which is affecting the United States in particular. Although the difficulties in the air transport sector were caused not by the attacks of 11 September but by structural considerations, the events of that day imposed new constraints on what was already a difficult situation, and it was those constraints which precipitated the current crisis, and which have been made worse by the present context of an economic recession.
I shall list the major constraints, in chronological order. Firstly, US airspace remained closed for four days, then passenger confidence was reduced and there was a considerable fall in the amount of air traffic operating - 20% fewer holiday flights compared with the year 2000, particularly on transatlantic routes where there was a drop of 30% - and to top it all there was the tragic accident two days ago, which will no doubt make the situation even worse. Then there is the fact that insurance companies have decided to raise insurance premiums for both passengers and aeroplanes in the case of accidents due to a state of war or to acts of terrorism. They have also decided to limit the airlines' coverage for third-party damages in the same circumstances to USD 50 million. What is more, additional security measures of necessity mean additional costs for airports and airlines. Last but not least, American aid, consisting of USD 15 billion in immediate aid and Federal credits to companies in addition to USD 120 million for suppliers of services, have now caused distortions in competition in relation to the European industry, in particular because they have made possible predatory practices on the part of certain companies on the transatlantic routes.
The economic and social consequences for Europe of this combination of structural and economic factors are well known: airlines are experiencing serious difficulties, some of them even going into liquidation, investment is at a standstill and the whole air transport sector is experiencing a terrible crisis.
What has been the Council' s response to all this so far?
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 15 November 2001.
Ladies and gentlemen, Spain has once again been cruelly struck by terrorism.
On 23 November, Ana Isabel Arostegui and Javier Mijangos, both officers of the Ertzaintza, the Basque regional police, were killed in a cowardly attack whilst carrying out their duties in Beasan, in the Basque region of Spain.
Two days prior to that incident, terrorists set off a bomb in Bilbao, injuring two other officers of the same police force.
On my own behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament as a whole, I immediately sent a message expressing my most sincere condolences to the families of the victims of these despicable attacks, as well as our wishes for a speedy recovery to those injured.
Once again, terrorist groups in Spain have acted with fatal disregard, showing that they deny the right to life and totally reject the concept of democracy. Having made an assault on justice, by killing Judge Jos Mara Lidon Corbi, they have, this time, attacked the Basque regional police force. In doing so, they are showing their determination to attack the main pillars of democracy.
With our heartfelt thoughts for the victims, their families and all those who fight for democracy, I would like to ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to observe a minute' s silence.
Ladies and gentlemen, since our last session, five journalists have unfortunately been killed in Afghanistan.
Maria Grazia Cutulli, Julio Fuentes, Harry Burton and Azizullah Haidari were killed in an ambush between Jalalabad and Kabul. Ulf Stroemberg was found dead following a burglary in Taloqan. As you know, we are also extremely concerned about Ken Hechtman, who is missing.
The eight journalists who have died in Afghanistan since the beginning of the conflict were carrying out their duties in a courageous, passionate and tenacious manner. They believed that it was their overriding duty to inform others. I would like to pay a warm and sincere tribute to them for the work they did, because they enabled us to keep constantly abreast of developments in Afghanistan.
Freedom of information is one of the most fragile freedoms. The death of these journalists illustrates this. I admire the way in which they fulfilled their duties.
At this time, our thoughts go out to their families and their colleagues, who are devastated by their loss. I would like to ask you to observe a minute' s silence in order to display our deepest sympathy.
With regard to the agenda, I have two changes to propose. First of all, the Committee on Budgets adopted Mr Ferber' s report on the supplementary estimates of revenue and expenditure of the European Parliament, and has asked for this report to be put on Thursday' s agenda, pursuant to Rule 114 of the Rules of Procedure.
The second proposal is from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, regarding the vote on Mr Bouwman' s report on the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, requesting that the vote be brought forward to tomorrow' s voting time. This is because the Council intends to take its decision on this on 3 December.
Madam President, I would just like to draw the attention of the House to what happened yesterday in Rome. A disaster occurred in which many firemen died and others were wounded; some of them are in an extremely serious condition. They rushed to save human lives with the same courage displayed by the firemen in New York. I feel that it is right for us, as European citizens and the European Parliament, to pay tribute to these brave men who have laid down their lives in an attempt to save the lives of others. A block of flats collapsed, and if these men had not sacrificed themselves, others might have died. I feel that Parliament should also pay tribute to these brave, remarkable firemen.
I want to draw attention to the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe. We have seen President Mugabe's wanton non-compliance with the undertakings given at the Abuja summit on September and only last weekend the snub he delivered to the visiting EU Troika. It seems time now to introduce smart sanctions against Mugabe and his henchmen. This is what we called for in Parliament's resolution and I would ask you to use your best offices now to bring that about.
As you know, Mr Van Orden, the comment made at the end of the troika' s visit was precisely that, if the undertakings were not complied with, the European Union would have no option but to take steps, including sanctions. I believe we shall be obliged to be consistent if things do not go well, as seems likely.
The next item is the report (A5-0391/2001) by Mr Fiori, on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Human Genetics and Other New Technologies in Modern Medicine, on the ethical, legal, economic and social implications of human genetics [2001/2097(INI)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in June last year, President Bill Clinton in the United States and Prime Minister Tony Blair in the United Kingdom presented to the world the map of the human genome, which had been arrived at simultaneously by their respective research groups. A month later, Nature brought the discoveries to the attention of the world scientific community in more detail. In the last few days, we have had news of the first experiment on the road towards human cloning in the United States.
As often happens with day-after prophecies, voices are now being raised in alarm, unanimously expressing the most indignant condemnation and concern. The researchers themselves recognise that they have shown the way to those who might want to commit the folly of cloning a human being.
These are two historic moments: little more than a year has passed between one and the other but it almost seems as if we are talking about two different periods in history. Beyond the concerns for the future, however, I think it is true to say that between these two historic moments a new approach to medicine emerged: curative medicine is giving way to a regenerative form of medicine oriented towards prediction. In the not too distant future, we shall probably be in a position to predict the diseases we are likely to suffer from and, more importantly, we shall be able to find ways of preventing these diseases from actually developing.
Two opposing paths thus open up, as often happens in the history of human discoveries: on the one hand, there opens the wonderful road of therapeutic hope; on the other, there lies the grim borderline with the ethical horror of human cloning. We, therefore, have the paradoxical task of setting limits in the vast reaches of the unknown that lies before us.
This is the greatest project of the new century and involves the whole of human kind. As people became aware of this, a need was felt to set up discussion groups to keep an eye on the ethical, social and legal implications of the new research programmes. The extraordinary possibilities of scientific and medical progress, seen in the light of its inherent potential, have indeed suddenly made alarm bells ring. It is this fear that drove Unesco to set up a bioethics committee to study the social implications of our knowledge of the genome, and that led, in 1997, to the approval of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights. Then the broad consensus reached by the Declaration led the United Nations General Assembly to commemorate the 50th anniversary of another vitally important document, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, by adopting the Unesco Declaration on the genome.
I have the feeling, however, that, when we get down to the details of the regulation, some of the principles that we have upheld so strongly dissolve away inexplicably. Although I am aware that this is a vast subject, I shall try to sum up the effects of the project on human rights and the dignity of human beings, which, of course, underlie our report. I shall summarise in four objectives the attempts and commitment to reconcile the longed-for progress of science with absolute respect for the sanctity of human life.
The first thing that stands out is the progress made in experimental genetics for the purpose of gaining therapeutic benefits. Using our knowledge of the genome as a starting point, clinical experiments are then required. Medicine itself shows that a moment always comes when such experiments have to be carried out on human beings, and so it is clearly necessary to take every step to ensure the safety of the patients experimented on, so that there is no risk to their health or, indeed, their life, and free and informed consent must always be obtained.
Secondly, from the little information we now have, it is true to say that our knowledge of the genome might enable us to mutate our genes. It is therefore absolutely essential to indicate, as from now, which doors we must never open. Here, I return to the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, which bans interventions on the genome that affect the germ line. The events of recent days seem to me not to have taken this direction. Furthermore, knowledge is in a continuous state of flux and requires constant monitoring. From the information we have, the only certainty we can hang on to is the fact that embryos are human, whatever their fate may be.
Thirdly, the doors opened by our knowledge of the genome lay us open to a serious risk that our privacy will be violated as a result of this very knowledge. We must be able to ensure that information derived from the knowledge of our genetic make-up cannot reach operators other than those who will use it for our own good. It is clear, indeed, that if it were possible to access information on the propensity of a particular person to a particular disease, we would be leaving ourselves open to a new source of discrimination, in the field of work, for instance, and elsewhere. We must be aware of this risk and of the need to take steps to prevent it.
Lastly, another objective that comes into play for the future of human kind is the globalisation of research. It is clear that research requires substantial investment and that financial incentives are indispensable for progress. It is also true, however, that we cannot allow the need for the results of progress to become the undisputed heritage of all human kind, to be sidelined. If we cannot globalise the benefits of our knowledge of the human genome, we can say, right now, we have failed. Science, instead of being a means to create a fairer world, will have helped to widen the gap between rich and poor and will have become yet one more instrument of social division.
In this respect, we must not forget the importance, not to mention the difficulty, of establishing proper, well thought-out patent regulations, the aim being the fair distribution of the benefits among all human beings: here again we see the balance between encouraging initiative and safeguarding human dignity and the instrument for achieving it. Concerned to safeguard human rights in the Member States, the Council of Europe gave precise indications at Oviedo: a ban on any form of discrimination based on genetic inheritance; a ban on interventions on the human genome that go beyond therapeutic purposes; an absolute ban on changing the hereditary genome; and a ban on choosing a baby' s sex. I believe we should uphold these points.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is a series of challenges facing scientists, legal experts, students of ethics, sociologists and those like us in the institutions who have to mark out the new path. I approached the report - a daunting task, and I do not know if I have been up to the job you asked me to do - guided by a principle which, to me, is absolutely fundamental: I did not consider going beyond the point where progress came up against the sanctity of human life, where it started to conflict with respect for human dignity. At this point, I considered it should be progress that should alter its course. One of these alternative courses is now well known: it is a non-destructive alternative, as promising as embryo cell research but using adult cells. I believe we should favour this option since, as well as being promising, it does not involve any kind of ethical or social conflict.
Respect for human dignity, in the context of biomedical research, implies that science should serve the people and not the other way round. All human beings must be protected at all stages of their lives, from conception until natural death, particularly if they are vulnerable or disabled. I am in favour of progress in scientific research, not least because it is a source of economic development, but I believe we have to ensure that it does not become a kind of death trap for human beings because due attention was not paid to the ethical principles that should underlie it.
Finally, I would like to thank all those who have collaborated on my report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Fiori, for his excellent work. I believe he has presented an outstanding report, and the political message is clear: we are saying yes to research, yes to the treatment of serious diseases, but human dignity is the overriding principle and can set limits even to research. This means, for example, that we reject the cloning of human beings at all stages of their development. The news from the USA that ACT has cloned a human embryo has probably shocked us all. People are right to be concerned.
I think being against the cloning of human embryos is neither right wing nor conservative. Let me quote from a document produced by the French Communist Party. It says that allowing therapeutic cloning by nuclear transfer gives rise to many ethical problems. The first problem concerns the embryo. The second concerns the woman as egg cell donor and the risk of actually creating a market. The third problem concerns the precautions that must be taken with reproductive cloning. Even if the two objectives of cloning are different, there is clearly a great danger of opening the door to a kind of automatism when we do not at present have the means to control this area.
There is nothing more to be said. So-called therapeutic cloning of embryos leads to reproductive cloning and that is why it must be banned. That is what the Fiori report says. I am shocked at the amendments tabled by the social democrats and others who want to delete this passage from the Fiori report. Neither are the arguments of those who want the deletion logical. In the Caudron report we decided that we did not want to encourage the cloning of embryos. I want to thank Commissioner Busquin because earlier this week the Commission again made quite clear that the Commission will not support this technology. But if we then fail to prohibit it, that is an invitation to firms like ACT to come to Europe if it is banned in the USA. I cannot imagine that the majority of Parliament wants that. I therefore ask you to support the Fiori report and reject the deletions.
Mr President, the work of the temporary committee on human genetics has been complex and interesting. The detailed and thorough report by Mr Fiori which accompanies the motion for a resolution is testimony to that. The motion for a resolution, presented by the rapporteur in committee, was, in its turn, a balanced synthesis of the conclusions that could be drawn from our inquiries. These dealt with the many ethical and political problems raised by the major scientific breakthroughs of recent years: the development of genetic tests which open up prospects of early identification and possible remedies for serious degenerative diseases, but also pose risks for the protection of personal data. In this field, such data concern not only the individual in question but all of his or her blood relatives as well. Therefore, alongside the right to know, everybody' s right to know the likelihood of being predisposed to diseases in the future, a new right now emerges: the right not to know, to deliberately face up to the fate that life holds in store for us, trusting in the future.
The committee addressed problems raised regarding the application of the patent system, the traditional instrument of industrial policy which favours the private funding of research, to those biotechnological and biomedical innovations that have to do with living organisms and therefore pose delicate questions of the limits between invention as a product of human activity and the discovery of living material, which cannot be appropriated.
Finally, the committee addressed the most far-reaching dilemmas of the new frontiers of research into stem cells, which offer extraordinary potential for possible applications. They may be able to root out diseases that have hitherto been intractable, but they also pose radical questions of ethical principles which must be considered insurmountable.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 29 November 2001.
Madam President, this concerns the Fiori report which we voted on in Brussels last time. I have to say that this was Parliament at its worst. We had a temporary committee which met for ten months to discuss an issue that could have been discussed within the existing committees. Firstly, it was an abuse of the temporary committee status - Parliament is very fortunate to have this privilege, and I do not think that we should abuse it, especially in the way it was abused with that vote and the final outcome.
As chairman of the Committee on Budgets, I would dearly love to know the cost of that temporary committee for an outcome that had nothing at the end of it. I would hope that, if we have temporary committees in future, they will deal with subjects outside the normal committee structure.
If we have enquiries in the future, let us try to carry them out within the budget and not give rise to excess expenditure.
Mr Wynn, I can assure you that you will receive an answer very soon.
The next item is the final draft agenda as drawn up at the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
Regarding Tuesday President. I have received a request from two groups, namely the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party concerning the Council and Commission statements on the WTO meeting in Qatar. The groups have asked for the debate to be followed by a vote for a resolution.
Madam President, the Commissioner probably gave us more than we already formally have in the extremely important negotiations which were preceded by many debates here in this Parliament, and were followed by a resolution which we presented to the Commission, to which the Commissioner made reference during the negotiations at every opportunity and stated: "in the final analysis, I need the majority and support of the European Parliament" . And we would now decide to hold a debate without a final say from us? I cannot really imagine this. I would also like to call on the fellow MEPs from the other parties, irrespective of the content of their opinions, to conclude this debate with a political verdict. We owe it to the Commission and to the dignity of this House. Since the negotiations are of such significance, we must really employ our full powers and reach a verdict.
Madam President, I do not think that anyone here will deny that the Doha Summit was an important political event, both for the European Union and for the whole world. I believe that it is equally important to carefully analyse the outcome of the summit and the decisions that were taken there. Rather than running the risk of adopting a superficial position, Parliament can simply publish a few brief considerations. However, I think that it is too early to carry out a serious political assessment, which is in fact what is expected of a parliament. I believe that we must wait and not vote for a resolution this week.
Still with regard to Tuesday, I have received a request from Mr Westendorp to postpone the vote on telecommunications until Wednesday.
Madam President, with regard to the telecommunications package which we are going to vote on - tomorrow, in principle - I would like to ask that the vote be delayed until Wednesday. We have just held a meeting with the Council and the Commission and they advise us that, so that the various groups may have time to examine the compromise proposals, that vote should be held a day later.
I now give the floor to Mr Katiforis, who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Katiforis (PSE). Madam President, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has considered how we should continue to work on this directive after we rejected the Commission proposal in the last plenary by a considerable majority. According to the regulation, we have two months in which to deliberate and then come up with a reply.
The Economic Committee has given me until Monday to complete my negotiations with colleagues, the Commission and the Presidency. From what I see, there is no urgency in the matter because in any case the political agreement supposedly reached in Council on the matter is not set to begin before July. There is therefore plenty of time for negotiation and for making contacts, and 15 January - when we shall reply - is not too far away. Therefore, I see no particular need for urgent procedure and my proposal is that we reject the urgency request.
Proposal for a Council decision on an exchange of letters between the European Community and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) concerning additional funding in 2001 under the current EC-UNRWA Convention for the years 1999-2001[COM(2001) 741 - C5-0663/2001 - 2001/0288(CNS)]
President. I will now give the floor to Mr Wynn who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible, the Committee on Budgets.
Madam President, last night the Committee on Budgets and, I understand, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy discussed this matter. There is no problem with urgency being granted and we can do it without report and without debate.
Draft Council regulation on specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities with a view to combating international terrorism[COM(2001) 569 - C5-0665/2001 - 2001/0228(CNS)]Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs
President. I will now give the floor to Mr Watson who will speak on behalf of the committee responsible, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
Colleagues will recall that we dealt with this matter in urgent procedure in October. I am pleased to be able to report that the Council has now accepted the legal base that was being proposed. However, we would contest the fact that neither of the two appendices is attached to the proposal, although we understand the reasons why. Nonetheless, we discussed this in committee last night and we recognise the urgency. We would propose an urgent procedure without report. It would then be up to the political groups to put forward amendments, which might be similar to those we adopted in October.
Presentation by Mr Prodi of the Commission work for the 2002 programme and the communication on the future of the European Union and strengthening the Community method
The next item is the Presentation of the Commission work for 2002 programme and the communication on the future of the European Union and strengthening the Community method.
I now give the floor to Mr Prodi, President of the Commission.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the annual debate on the State of the Union is one of our most important debates and, this year, it is taking place at a key moment for the European Union. In recent days and months, a Greater Europe has truly been taking shape. In less than twelve months, it will be possible to conclude the negotiations with the candidate countries that have satisfied the criteria set for enlargement, which will mean that the Union will be able to welcome up to ten new Member States before the next European elections.
In less than three weeks, the euro, the strongest and most visible sign of both the economic and political union of Europe, will become a tangible reality. Lastly, before the end of the week, the Laeken European Council will take the decision to set up a Convention, which will do the groundwork for the reform of the Treaties and, for the first time, bring together representatives of governments, national parliaments, the European Commission and this House. This greater Europe which is taking shape is a united, democratic, forward-looking Europe. The Commission has been working towards this in the year now drawing to a close and intends to continue to do so in the year that will shortly commence.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, before moving on to the work carried out by the Commission in 2001 and our programme for 2002, I would like to stress once again my belief that full, transparent cooperation between the institutions is essential for the smooth running of the Union. With this in mind, as early as January this year, I told you of the Commission's intention to revitalise our method of working together in order to make cooperation between our two institutions even more effective and transparent.
Before setting out these proposals, I would like, however, to go through the fundamental principles on which, I believe, our cooperation must be based. Firstly, the Commission's right of initiative must be safeguarded, as it is one of the pillars of the Community structure and the guarantor of its integrity. A strong Commission means a strong European Parliament. Secondly, the tripartite nature of interinstitutional cooperation must be safeguarded. Indeed, it will only be effective if the two legislative bodies - Parliament and the Council - can enter into dialogue with the Commission on a common basis of transparency.
I would now like to turn to my proposals for revitalising the system, which, I am sure, will help to greatly improve dialogue between our institutions. Firstly, from this year on, the work programme will no longer be a catalogue of planned legislation for that year; it will, as you have requested, be a genuine political programme. This programme, which the Commission hereby undertakes to follow closely, sets out both the priorities for the year in question and the initiatives needed to accomplish them. I know that some of you were surprised not to receive an annex to the 2002 work programme listing planned legislation, as has been the case in previous years. However, I want to point out that we listened very carefully to the views many of you expressed in this Chamber on 13 February. You asked the Commission, quite clearly, to abandon the method of listing legislative proposals employed thus far and to adopt a new method. We have made sure we complied with that request.
For these reasons, which were also set out in writing by Mrs Fontaine on 10 September, we have replaced the catalogue with the much more reliable instrument of quarterly programming, which is what the College uses to plan its work and of which you will be informed at regular intervals. To maintain perfect transparency, however, I have also asked the Secretary-General of the Commission to forward immediately to the Secretary-General of Parliament the preliminary list of proposals put forward by the Commission departments which formed the basis for the work programme for 2002. If this approach produces positive results, we are willing to use it in future years as well.
Secondly, it is equally important to point out that, in future, the preparation of such a programme will need to be based on a more structured dialogue between our institutions. This is why we have planned a multi-stage approach for the forthcoming year, with the preparation of the work programme for 2003 starting at the beginning of 2002. The two key dates for this political dialogue will be in February, when I will come to present to you the political priorities approved by the Commission for 2003, and November, when I will come to set out to you the work programme the Commission has adopted on the basis of these priorities.
The discussions at the Conference of Presidents have shown me that we are in agreement on the broad outline I have just described. For our part, we will make a start as soon as possible on establishing the details and commencing practical implementation. Mrs de Palacio, who, at my request, has begun a dialogue with you on this matter, will continue her work and the dialogue with the aim of concluding our agreement next January. Lastly, I feel it is important to stress that breaking the process down into stages should not increase our respective workloads but should enable us to continue to assume our respective responsibilities.
With regard to the 2001 budget, the list of what has been done over the course of a year is too long for me to give you a detailed account here and now. I shall therefore confine myself to focusing on the areas in which the Union, with a decisive contribution from the Commission, has achieved its greatest successes in 2001: the preparations for the changeover to the euro; the progress made in the enlargement negotiations; relations with the Balkan countries; the dialogue with Russia; the opening of a new round of trade negotiations at Doha; the adoption of a strategy for sustainable development which goes far beyond the mere adoption of a series of specific measures and which will gradually bring us to review all our internal policies; and lastly, the reinvigoration of the process of creating a common European area of justice and security, which has had a particularly high profile since 11 September. Throughout the year, in each of these fields, the Commission's actions have benefited from the crucial support of this House.
Looking ahead to 2002, to give you a clearer picture of our tasks for the coming year, I am also sure that you will allow me to present the seven priorities indicated by the Commission in its work programme for 2002 by grouping them under four key headings. These four major areas are internal security, the euro and economic and social matters, enlargement and, lastly, the Future of Europe debate and the process of reforming the Union' s institutions.
The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed. Are there any comments?
Mr President, I would like it noted as a matter of urgency that the case of Dr. Ganzert, an attorney from Wels, has been dismissed. He is at present being held without good cause by the authorities in Nicaragua and has for three weeks been endeavouring to get permission to leave the country. I wish, though, to thank you, Madam President, for writing to the authorities in Nicaragua and asking for him to be given an exit visa.
(The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved) President. I should like to inform the House that the Minister of Justice for Belgium, the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Verwilghen, cannot be present at the beginning of this debate because of fog in Brussels. We are expecting him to arrive at some stage. I suggest to the House that we will have to continue the debate and our agenda therefore. We look forward to the Minister's arrival.
Mr President, I would like you to take note of my strong protest at the conditions under which this debate is to be held. I am not referring to the absence of the Minister, although this is also a problem, but to the systematic manner in which the Conference of Presidents organises debates relating to the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, amalgamating every topic into a joint debate. It seems to me to show a total lack of respect that, at the same time and for the same duration as a debate of such great importance as that on annual progress in the field of Justice and Home Affairs, we should also be debating the Hazan report on the Council report on justice and home affairs: EU priorities and policy objectives for external relations and the Watson report on a recommendation to the Council on an area of Freedom, Security and Justice: security at meetings of the European Council and other comparable events, and any other matter that may be on this Committee' s agenda. Mr President, this is the same as if we were to debate the assignment of radio frequencies and the association agreement with Egypt at the same time because they are both the remit of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy. I hope that more respect will be shown in future.
I suggest that you raise this matter with your own group leader and that this be a subject, therefore, for the Conference of Presidents to discuss.
Mr President, on Monday, when the sitting opened, I asked for Members to be provided with a copy of the letters exchanged between Mr Bush and Mr Prodi. Mrs Fontaine assured us that she would do what was necessary. At Monday' s extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, I put the same request to the Commission representatives, who seemed surprised that Members had not seen this correspondence. We did in fact manage to find Mr Bush' s letter to Mr Prodi, sent a whole two months ago, on the Internet, but we still do not have a copy of the reply Mr Prodi sent at the end of November.
Furthermore, it seemed that our Committee on Citizens' Freedoms had agreed on the need to see this letter. I therefore ask you whether a copy can be provided.
I have to inform you that the President did not say that she would make the correspondence available because the correspondence is not available to us as a Parliament. That is the difficulty that we are in. So I am afraid that cannot be instituted.
The next item is the joint debate on the following two oral questions:
Oral question to the Council (B5-0534/2001) by Alima Boumediene-Thiery, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the 2001 annual debate on the area of freedom, security and justice (Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty)
Oral question to the Commission (B5-0535/2001) by Alima Boumediene-Thiery, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the 2001 annual debate on the area of freedom, security and justice (Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty)
Ladies and gentlemen, the conclusions of the Tampere Summit have given new impetus to the establishment of an area of freedom, security and justice. With a view to attaining the objectives that were set, a plan of action was drawn up, which provides for its establishment between two and five years after the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force. It is now time for a mid-term review of the progress made on the Tampere agenda, in the light of the Commission' s timetable.
The area of security, freedom and justice covers three major aspects: the Community' s asylum and immigration policy, strengthening judicial cooperation and police cooperation. So let us look at the situation regarding each of these three aspects.
On the question of asylum and immigration policy and, more specifically, the management of migration flows, under the measures that have been taken, immigration is regarded as a palliative for manpower shortages and as compensation for the demographic imbalances of the states involved, without taking account of the human or social dimension or the consequences of the brain drain. However, surely this Community migration policy calls into question the universal nature of fundamental rights?
Is the re-admission policy consistent with international obligations regarding the protection of refugees and the right of asylum? As for the European Observatory on Migration, I have a reservation. Surely we have to admit that first of all we need to reflect on its purpose, its usefulness and the position of the NGOs concerned with migration in this Observatory.
Not a single significant measure has been taken to ensure that third-country nationals are treated fairly. As for their political participation and the re-definition of citizenship, this question has been evaded on the pretext of protecting national sovereignty, which comes down to denying the democratic rights of citizens resident in Europe. How does the Commission propose to promote citizenship based on residence as a means of ensuring their rights? Furthermore, what action does the Council propose to take on the directives on reuniting families, on the status of non-Europeans who are long-term residents and on freedom of movement, establishment and work on the territory of the Member States?
The Geneva Convention forms the basis of asylum policy. However, the concept of refugee must encompass both the gender aspect and the social aspect. Is the Council prepared to respond to the specific sufferings of women and victims of civil war? Surely the Eurodac system, based on a data bank of fingerprints, presents a risk to asylum seekers? Furthermore, should the Dublin Convention not be reviewed? The competence of a state to examine a file and the decision-making responsibility should be decided on the basis of the asylum seeker' s choice of country of residence rather than by the country of arrival, which is so difficult to decide in a Union that has supposedly abolished borders.
The action plans adopted for partnership with third countries are looking more and more like a means of holding back immigration. What is the situation regarding development aid, a corollary to restricting emigration? Has cooperation been reduced to financing extradition? Surely the introduction of administrative police at the points of entry from third countries is a negation of the right to seek asylum? Some progress has been made at civil level, in relation to strengthening judicial cooperation. Several texts have been adopted on judicial powers, the notification of acts, the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions and their enforcement, especially in the matrimonial field and in relation to parental responsibility.
Madam President, I should like to point out, with respect to yesterday's minutes, that Dr Ganzert, the lawyer detained in Nicaragua, has now been allowed to leave, and to thank you for everything you did to bring this about.
At yesterday' s meeting of the Conference of Presidents, it was decided that the sitting of Monday 17 December in Brussels will be extended by one hour.
The part-session will therefore begin at 3 p.m. and end at 7.30 p.m.
Madam President, as the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, we are against the extension of the Monday sitting, which will serve only to get the anti-terrorism package approved. This package was presented in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs this morning, but we could not proceed to the discussion because of the very tight deadlines, and no report was drawn up. I think it is worrying that Parliament should express an opinion without first having drawn up a report on such an important subject. We are therefore against this shortening of deadlines, because it simply does not allow us to present a reasoned report on such an important subject.
Thank you, Mr Di Lello Finuoli. It will therefore be recorded in the Minutes that you are not in favour of the decision taken by the Conference of Presidents.
I shall now give the floor to Mr Watson, the chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
Watson (ELDR), chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs. Madam President, last night two requests were referred to my committee under Rule 112. These relate to re-consultation on two framework decisions from the Council, one on combating terrorism, the other on a proposal for a European arrest warrant. We were asked to treat these as a matter of urgency. My committee met this morning and agreed to propose to the plenary that we agree to urgency for these texts as submitted without report.
Thank you, Mr Watson. We shall therefore act in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, as usual.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in the six years that I have been an MEP, Parliament has constantly asked the European institutions to show it some respect. Today, once again, Parliament is being asked not even to respect itself and we have heard the two larger groups, in the 'Citizens' Freedoms' Committee, decide with the Liberals that Parliament must not act with self-respect. This is, however, incredible since we are going to vote on the European arrest warrant, which will enter into force in 2004, namely in two years' time, and today they are telling us that there will be a Laeken European Council. This European Council will decide on a text on Sunday night. This text will be reviewed by lawyers on Monday morning. No one will have seen the text before arriving in Brussels on Monday afternoon. And Parliament is going to vote on it, and cannot wait until January. Can you explain to me why we cannot take a vote in January on a text that will come into force in 2004? It is absurd, it is ridiculous and it shows that Parliament does not take itself seriously, and I urge my fellow Members not to support the leaders of their groups, but to show some dignity and to reject this request, to have a report, to vote in January and show that this Parliament respects parliamentary rules and that we are not at anyone' s beck and call. Thank you.
We shall now hear a Member who is in favour of this request.
Madam President, much less vehemently but, I believe, just as justifiably, I would like to ask this Parliament to vote in favour of this urgent motion. We in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs have been working on this issue for a year. On 5 September we voted in favour of Mr Watson' s report in which we asked for concrete Commission proposals in favour of harmonising penalties in the field of terrorism and establishing mutual recognition of sentences, which is known, inappropriately in my view, as the European arrest warrant.
There have been passionate and interesting debates in our committee, and it is a shame that Mr Cohn-Bendit has not been able to follow them.
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday 13 December 2001 have been distributed.
Madam President, I have a question concerning the complete report of the meetings: last Wednesday evening Vice-President Onesta announced that a vote would be held on Thursday morning on an urgent debate on the European arrest warrant. However, on Thursday morning, Mr Watson, chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, asked the plenary meeting to vote on an urgent debate on - I quote now from the complete report - "two framework decisions from the Council, one on combating terrorism, the other on a proposal for a European arrest warrant" .
Confusion abounds. It proves in particular that last Thursday' s decision was taken too hastily and carelessly. Can you explain to me, on the basis of the complete report of the meetings, on which topics precisely we are to hold an urgent debate? And since we are on the subject of clarification, can you also assure me that the text on the European arrest warrant on which we could submit amendments up to 4 p.m. last Thursday is still the same text and was not changed last weekend? If that were the case, we would again be making incredible fools of ourselves today.
In answer to your question, Mrs Buitenweg, the subject is solely the European arrest warrant.
As you know, this is practically the last time that I will have the honour of presiding over this House. I am pleased to be able to do so on the occasion of this Conference of Presidents, where Mr Verhofstadt, the President-in-Office of the Council, will give us his account of the Laeken Summit and of a Belgian Presidency that has been particularly outstanding.
I am not going to make a speech. I would just like to say a few words to once again sincerely thank you for the confidence you placed in me when, on 20 July 1999, you elected me President of the European Parliament.
I took on this role with determination, with passion and with an overriding desire to accurately reflect the beliefs and the positions of the majority in this House to the greatest extent possible.
In this regard, I would like to tell you that I have always been able to feel proud of the European Parliament.
If I may, I would like to thank in particular the Secretary-General, Mr Julian Priestley, and all those working here who have helped me with their extraordinary degree of motivation and friendship.
I thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for the unfaltering support you have given me, and I would hope that my successor can enjoy a Presidency that is as active and happy as that I have had the fortune to experience myself.
(Loud applause) Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you, from the bottom of my heart.
Madam President, allow me first and foremost, in my role as President-in-Office of the European Council, to show my gratitude, and also my admiration, for your Presidency. Under your guidance, the European Parliament has accomplished an impressive political and legislative career. You yourself have carried out the work of a pioneer, both externally and in the EU itself. Well before the start of the crisis in Afghanistan, you drew our attention to this issue, and you had already embarked upon the fight for the improvement of the situation of women in this country.
Your role in the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights should not be underestimated, and this is an issue of relevance to all European citizens.
At Laeken, we once again used the model for a Convention of which you, personally, were one of the architects. In many respects, you have prepared the European Parliament for the new phase that is opening up in inter-institutional relations.
Lastly, I would also like thank you most warmly for the excellent degree of cooperation that has been apparent between Parliament and the Council during both our Presidencies. Thank you very much.
Madam President, I too would like to express my deepest admiration for your work and my sincerest appreciation of the results achieved during your term as President of the European Parliament. These have been extremely important years which have seen the launching of the key debates for the future of the Union. You have played an extremely active, diligent and committed part in all this, constantly remaining open to the demands of the European public and the needs of us all.
Both Parliament, therefore, as we have just seen, and the Commission too are grateful to you for your constant, effective endeavours. At this time, I would like to make particular mention of your great sensitivity, evident in your constant rejection of any form of violence, especially terrorist violence. Your speeches, Madam President, have been moderate in tone but clear and incisive in substance, and they have encouraged and sustained all the democratic Europeans in their fight for peaceful coexistence amongst their citizens.
I wish you every success in the future, which I am sure you will spend in the service of the European cause for which you have done so much in the past two and a half years. Thank you, Madam President.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, today is the day for saying some very, very warm words of thanks to our President, Nicole Fontaine, who is from our group, for discharging her duties over the last two and a half years - as she herself has just said - with such passion.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 17 December 2001.
Before discussing the order of business, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to take just a minute of your time to add my sincere tribute to those paid by all Parliamentary groups to our outgoing President, Mrs Fontaine, during the sitting of 17 December. I was one of those standing against her two years ago, as I am sure you all remember. I am, therefore, delighted to acknowledge today and thank her for her dignity, impartiality, efficiency and the exceptional elegance with which she has fulfilled her duties in the service of the European Union, thereby increasing the prestige of our Parliament.
Following the decisions taken by the Conference of Presidents on 10 January, a final draft agenda has been distributed.
I should, nevertheless, like to draw the House' s attention to the fact that the order of business for the current part-session will be established definitively at 9.00 a.m. on Wednesday.
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure, the election of the President will take place tomorrow, from 10.00 a.m.
I would remind you that, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure, no debate on any subject other than the election of the President or the verification of credentials can take place while the Oldest Member is in the Chair.
Pursuant to Rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure, nominations for the Presidency of the European Parliament must be submitted - with the agreement of the individuals concerned - by a political group or by a minimum of 32 Members.
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure, the following nominations have been submitted for the Presidency of the European Parliament:
The candidates have informed me that they accept their nominations. I would also point out that, pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Rules of Procedure, in order to be elected, a candidate must obtain - in the first three rounds of voting - an absolute majority of the votes cast. Blank and spoilt ballot papers will not be counted among the votes cast.
In order to speed up tomorrow morning' s work, I propose that we draw lots now to select the six tellers.
I can now tell you that Mrs Patsy Srensen, Mr Dieter-Lebrecht Kock, Mr Giuseppe Nistic, Mr Reinhard Rack, Mr Ilkka Suominen and Mrs Alima Boumediene-Thiery have been appointed tellers.
We shall now proceed to the election of the President, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Rules of Procedure:
Good morning colleagues. This Parliament must continue to be multilingual. Eleven languages make 110 combinations. Twenty-two languages make 462 combinations. Thirty-five languages make 1 090 combinations. Can you imagine a translation from Finnish, via English and French, to Polish? With direct translation some will vote for budget line 2 while others are still voting on budget line 1. With more than one relay our system will not work. If we do not go for reform, then most of us will no longer be able to use our own language. In two years we might have ten new Member States. Our buildings are not prepared for that.
Soon even more countries - from the Ukraine to the Balkans - will be applicant countries. We risk a Babel-like confusion. Our next President must dedicate himself to internal reform and successful enlargement. Indeed our next President will not have much time to travel around.
We need a craftsman, a handyman, rather than a statesman. All of us will be to blame if we are not prepared for enlargement by 2004. How we vote today is part of that responsibility.
Every vote for me is a clear signal to Mr Cox and Mr Martin: limit your ambitions to enlargement and internal reform. Today we lose a lot of time over badly prepared votes. If journalists ask how we voted, we do not always know. If we knew, we would not have time to serve our people. We would then be bad MEPs. Leave it to the committees to prepare the votes. Let the plenary deal with the important political issues. Give us at least one week to consult and consider how we will vote. Today many Members are not allowed to speak in debates. If you represent a small delegation in a big group, or an alternative view, the group whips will seldom allow you to speak. Give every Member the right to speak at least three times a year. Leave one-third of the speaking time for real debates. Let us corner the commissioner when he or she states that the Commission can accept Amendment No 3 and rejects Amendments Nos 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Today common decision-making takes place between the Commission and the Council. They share the information. Even in the conciliation committees our Members have no access to working documents, legal notes or Minutes. Does "common" really mean "unilateral"? In the committees the Members discuss draft laws based on outdated drafts. Behind us sit young civil servants from the permanent representations. The Commission and the Council have all the information we cannot get. I have been here for 22 years. In that time as an elected Member, I have never received adequate information from the committee. To get information I have to find sources like journalists. Our next President must ensure that all information is available to all of us and, if necessary, take the Commission and the Council to court.
Today, 70% of all laws are passed by junior civil servants in working groups. Fifteen percent are settled by the ambassadors. Only 15% reach the level of the ministers who then read manuscripts prepared by civil servants. Democracy was born in Europe and buried in the Commission and the Council. Our next President should re-establish democracy. He should inspire us to discuss whether our future Europe should be the federalist vision of a democratic EU or a Europe of democracies. Our next President should unite all elected representatives from national parliaments and the European Parliament in moving law-making from behind closed doors into the open, from civil servants to elected Members.
For what is now needed I offer my skills and energy. But all I ask is to borrow your vote in the first round: firstly, because it might be your only chance to vote for me; secondly, because many votes will test the groups behind Mr Cox and Mr Martin. This time we need a practical and politically-neutral shop steward to serve all of us. Give yourself a better choice. Improve on both Cox and Martin by voting Mr Bonde from office number 007.
By the end of the day we will have a better presidency thanks to those who drafted the "fair chair platform" and created the first real electoral battle in our history. The next chair will have a real mandate. He deserves our full support.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, decision time is now upon us. We have had more candidates, we have had more debate, and we have had more openness. It represents a change in the method, in the way we have done our business. It is a good change and I hope it is a signal of an appetite throughout this House to engage in the years which come and the balance of this mandate in a culture of transformation of how we do our business.
The campaign reveals many perspectives, not least about the strengths and weaknesses of the candidates - and I have my share of both. I read about myself in polite journals that I am loquacious. I live in Ireland, where we are all loquacious, near Blarney where there is a stone and a castle. When visitors come there and kiss that stone, they say in Hibernian English that they leave with the gift of the gab, meaning loquacious in polite journals.
I may be that, but the more important part of this campaign is that it has offered the opportunity to listen and to learn. I have listened and I have learned that there is an appetite for change, that there is a great feeling in this House that we need to do more politics in the best and visionary sense of that word. I have learned that we want less voting and less technicalities and more capacity to be politicians and to bring our influence to bear. In other words, we want more vitality in how we manage our affairs. We need to bring closure to many of the issues of reform that have been before us for so long. The complex Members' statute is difficult and the hard work led by Nicole Fontaine is testament to that. But we must continue to try. I tell this to Members: I will, in a hands-on way, try to achieve that reform, but never over the heads of the Members of this House. It will be done in the fullest, most transparent and open shared consultation.
I have learned here how good we are at legislating on and talking about equal opportunity and gender equality, but how bad we are sometimes as an institution at putting it into practice. I pledge today before this House that, should I have the privilege to lead at the end of the day, I will promote the equality of gender in various ways, but most visibly and at the outset by it being apparent in the construction of the Cabinet.
Since 1998 I have had the privilege to lead the Liberal Democrat Group and together, I believe, with my colleagues, we have established a capacity for doing politics, which is the business of this institution. We are 626 Members, we are a Parliament. I am not seeking, Mr Bonde or other colleagues who share your fears, to be the sixteenth president or prime minister of the sixteenth state. I am proud to be a parliamentarian and we must bring our parliamentary and democratic vision to bear on the great issues of the day in Europe. We must make Europe fit for a future on a continental scale and we must make the democracy in this House fit to offer a real leadership and act as a counterweight and check and balance against the excesses of technocracy or bureaucracy.
I want to say to Hans-Gert Poettering and to the PPE-DE Group how greatly I appreciate his and their unswerving commitment to be full and faithful partners to an agreement which we made. But I want to say this also: I have had the privilege to visit many groups, many committees, many intergroups. I want, if I can, to lead a Presidency which is a stakeholder Presidency, open to build on the talents of those who will contribute. I ask you for your support.
Finally, Mr President, smaller groups in this House do not find themselves with the credible possibility that my Liberal Democrat Group finds it has today. I do not know what the final result will be, but I know this much: I cannot see how those who say that they value more openness, a change in the system, who would like to see a fairer share for all, can reconcile this with voting for a large-group candidate, not because of any fault with the candidate, but because of the nature of the system we have. If you wish to transform the system, today's vote will be the first mark of whether we are dedicated to transformation and change. That is my appeal; I ask for your support. I should love to have the privilege to lead; but the choice now rests with you.
Mr President, colleagues, I make no apology for beginning my contribution by thanking the outgoing President, Mrs Fontaine, for the work that she did as President. She led the fight against terrorism long before 11 September. It is to her credit that she took those initiatives at that time.
Before a vote is even cast in this election, we already know the winner. The winner is the European Parliament because, as Pat Cox has rightly said, we have had an open election, keenly, but fairly contested. That can only help to raise the profile and to improve the image of this institution - something which frankly is very necessary. The 1999 European elections, Eurobarometer and other opinion polls all demonstrate that this institution has an image problem. With the Convention, enlargement and the 2004 European elections, we face enormous challenges.
Every Member of this Parliament now has the opportunity, in a secret ballot, to vote for the person they believe can best guide us through this vital phase.
I have been a Member of this Parliament for 17 years. I have had the honour of being its Vice-President for 12 of them. In that time I proved my determination to work for Parliament and for all its Members. As rapporteur on the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties, I negotiated with heads of government to secure codecision for this Parliament. As one of Parliament's representatives on COSAC, I worked to convince national parliaments of the importance of the convention method for the next reform of the Treaties. As Vice-President of Parliament I have sought to modernise and improve our working methods.
I am deeply conscious of the fact that everything I have achieved in this Parliament has been achieved through working with colleagues across the political spectrum. I have fought for what I believe to be right, and I have done that, sometimes, against the interests of my own political group and sometimes even against the interests of my own country.
I should like to take this opportunity to give you the results of our vote yesterday for the Vice-Presidents. As you know, we elected the Vice-Presidents by acclaim and then held a vote to establish the order of precedence. The number of Members voting was 554, the number of blank or void votes 9, the votes cast 545. The votes were cast as follows:
Mr van Orden has the floor for a point of order.
Mr President, I should like to draw your attention to the continuing deterioration of the situation in Zimbabwe. Last Friday Zimbabwean ministers had a meeting with EU representatives and they have been asked to write a letter or a report by tomorrow on improvements in the situation in Zimbabwe. In fact, over the last week things have continued to deteriorate. It is very important that the international community should show that it really means business by bringing Mugabe's regime in Zimbabwe to task. We need to be preparing smart sanctions now.
I urge you to ensure that the Council and the Commission take a uniformly tough line on Zimbabwe before it is too late. Presidential elections will be held there on 9 March and time is running out.
Thank you very much, Mr Van Orden, we take note of your words and we shall communicate them to the Presidency.
Mr MacCormick has the floor for another point of order.
Mr President, I should like to take up a point Mrs McKenna raised yesterday concerning electronic voting and the secret ballot. It is unhappily the case that the secret ballot arrangement by electronic voting is imperfect at the moment. It is imperfect because, even when one uses the device mentioned by Mrs Jackson yesterday of a paper to cover the screen, it is easy for one's colleagues behind and beside to see how one voted. When a secret ballot is important, Members should be protected from peer-group pressure.
I would therefore like you to refer to the Bureau the question of whether the electronic voting system can be improved in order to really function as a secret ballot and protect Members from those pressures from which they ought to be protected.
Thank you Mr MacCormick, it is not necessary to communicate this request to the Bureau, since it already began to study this issue yesterday. There are other possibilities. It is not that your consideration is irrelevant and we perfectly understand your political interest, but on the basis of our experience yesterday, which was the first under this system, the services are examining how to resolve this issue. I, as the person responsible - for the moment, since the allocation of posts in the Bureau has still not been decided and I still have my former responsibilities in relation to buildings -, received a proposal yesterday afternoon which related to this.
I therefore imagine that the Bureau will be able to resolve this issue soon, with the help of the Quaestors.
Mr Sumberg has the floor for a point of order. I would ask you not to spend too long on points of order.
Mr President, on a point of order. May I ask you to ask the President of this Parliament to note that a vote took place here yesterday for a full inquiry into foot-and-mouth disease in the United Kingdom. The vote for that was carried because the British Labour Government refused my constituents an inquiry into that terrible disease. In this Parliament yesterday the British Socialists ...
Mr Sumberg, please, this is not a point of order. I know that you have the right to try to take advantage the opportunities granted you in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, but it was not a point of order. Thank you.
The next item is the report (A5-0470/2001) by Mrs Migulez Ramos, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the Commission White Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy [COM(2001) 135 - C5-0261/2001 - 2001/2115(COS)]
Ladies and gentlemen, I regret to inform you that Mr Fischler, the Commissioner responsible for the issues dealt with in the three reports on this morning' s agenda, is ill. He was in Strasbourg yesterday, and he is still in Strasbourg at the moment, but he will not be able to take part in these debates. I must therefore ask you to forgive the Commission' s absence. I believe that we cannot paralyse debates, but that we should go ahead. The Commission will be represented here by the top officials responsible but not by the Commissioner, who will not be able to participate. On the other hand, the Council, which is not present either, has not apologised for its absence. I believe that we must move ahead with our agenda.
On behalf of the House, I would like to wish Mr Fischler a speedy recovery.
Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, has the floor.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 17 January 2002.
The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed. Are there any comments?
Mr President, I should like to ask you to add my name to the attendance register. Not only did I vote, I even took the floor during that session; yet I am not included on the list. I hope that this can be rectified.
I should like to inform the House that I received, shortly after my arrival in office, advice from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, inviting the President to submit to the European Court of Justice for review the question of the legal base with regard to the European Company Statute. The deadline for implementing that request was today. I consulted widely, both inside and outside the House on this issue and had the opportunity to hear opinions of the Conference of Presidents. I have made a decision, while respecting the weight of the argument - which is a substantial legal argument - not to make a reference to the European Court of Justice.
Essentially I have made this decision, prior to the forthcoming convention and having regard to the Laeken Declaration which expressly mentions Articles 95 and 308 - the articles in dispute in this case - so we can make an act of political faith between ourselves and the other institutions as we prepare for that convention. I have since spoken to the President of the European Commission and to the President of the Council, Mr Aznar Lpez. I am assured in both cases that they understand the political act of faith which has been made. I believe that they will want, in the coming weeks, to try to find between our institutions a way to recognise the substance of these issues, which is about our role as a Parliament in representing citizens of the Union and their concerns in the law-making process.
I hope that in the end this act of political faith in the primacy of politics will be repaid, understood and not misunderstood. It is important - this side of the Barcelona Summit, with an issue that has been with us for three decades and perhaps has no parallel in the issues before us - to appreciate that it was not an easy decision to arrive at. I hope, in the end - both for those in the House who were inclined to agree with my view last week and for the many who were inclined at that time to disagree - that they will appreciate that the judgment is one made in good faith. I believe we can build on it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, most of you will be aware that I have taken a different line from our President. However, I respect this decision, and if you have succeeded in bringing forth from this result an attitude of goodwill that will later actually be reflected in amendments to the Treaties or in some other acknowledgement of our rights, that would be a success that would not have been possible without the joint action of the Legal Affairs Committee and our President.
Mr President, I totally agree with your decision. I believe that what we are dealing with here is an act of political faith, in view of the fact that we are attempting to defend the existence of the European Company Statute, without prejudice to the fundamental issues arising from the legal base.
Mr President, as you know, my position was quite the opposite and I am still convinced that it is a mistake not to refer the matter to the Court of Justice. I simply wanted to say this in plenary as well, because if we accept that the Council can pass an act under the co-decision procedure, taking away the power of co-decision from Parliament, we are playing into the Council' s hands. Unfortunately, I do not think that the Council will look upon this in a positive light, but rather as something that it can do again. I just wanted to say, therefore, that I think it is a mistake not to refer the matter to the Court of Justice.
Mr President, I wish to congratulate you on your decision not to make a reference to the European Court of Justice, as the creation of the European Company was one of the objectives for this parliamentary session, and is one of the five decisions for which the economy has been waiting. For thirty years, this decision has been awaited; for thirty years, negotiations have been in progress. To go to the Court of Justice now would mean this business being dragged out for another five or six years; for I am convinced that no firm would avail itself of this important new form under such uncertain conditions. So I believe it wise in this case to refrain from making a reference to the European Court of Justice.
Mr President, on a point of order: it will hardly surprise the House if, on behalf of my Group, I support the position you have taken. But I would nonetheless urge you in your intervention at the European Council in Barcelona to make the point very strongly that we as a House are not happy with the procedure that has been taken and that we hope in the future to see a much more constructive and collaborative approach to us from the other institutions.
Mr President, as you know, the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports your decision.
From a legal point of view, whether or not we have lost influence in the co-decision procedure is debatable. My group - as Mr Medina Ortega has already stated - thinks not and that also, from a political point of view, the decision we have taken is the right one.
As we approach the Barcelona Summit, I would ask you to not only defend our position with regard to the implications of this decision for the European business world, but also, given its importance, from the point of view of consolidating economic democracy and workers' rights.
At the Conference of Presidents' meeting on 31 January 2002 it was decided to alter the duration of the adjournment of the session. I should like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 10(4) a plenary sitting will be held in Brussels on Wednesday, 20 March 2002. The purpose of that sitting will be to hear the outcome of the Barcelona Summit meeting. It will be addressed by the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Aznar.
The next item is the report (A5-0392/2001) by Olle Schmidt, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the EIB Annual Report for 2000 (C5-0541/2001 - 2001/2218(COS)).
Mr President, Mr Maystadt, I should like to thank you, Mr Maystadt, very much for the kindness and readiness to help which you and your colleagues have shown to me and the committee. It made the work considerably easier. I also wish to thank my colleagues.
The role of the EIB has been of topical interest in the debate in recent years, and criticisms have been made. These have mainly been targeted at deficiencies when it comes to environmental issues, openness and transparency. The EIB has understood the criticism, and significant changes have taken place. For this, you, Mr Maystadt, and your colleagues deserve our recognition.
The analysis for the year is in many respects a follow-up to the sterling work carried out a year ago by Mr Lipietz. A number of the views put forward at that time are being repeated now. As is well known, the most important issue for the EU is enlargement. This involves a fundamental change constituting a major challenge both for the candidate countries and the current Member States.
Today, most EIB loans go to different types of regional development project within the EU. That is certainly fully compatible with Statutes of the EIB, but future enlargement makes it necessary to reconsider this distribution of resources. There must be an increase in the future Member States' share of the total loans.
Solidarity on the part of the EU must also, of course, extend to include third countries that until now have been recipients of EIB loans. Among these are the Balkan countries, the Mediterranean countries and the ACP countries. Now it is also Russia' s turn. There is also a need for discussion concerning which less developed countries the EIB is mandated by the Council to support and concerning whether, for example, the 49 least developed countries are not in fact in greater need than the ACP countries traditionally supported by the EU.
In the information society, economic growth and an improved standard of living are not only the results of constructing new roads and factories, but also of education, innovation, new technology, e-commerce and the development of other knowledge-intensive sectors. In my view, this has to be reflected to a greater extent in the EIB' s activities.
It is important that the EIB should continue to strengthen its support for small and medium-sized enterprises. There are clear opportunities for growth in this area. The EIB needs to become more active in making SMEs more aware of the possibilities that already exist for granting such loans.
From having been a rather closed institution, the EIB has begun to change its attitude to information and transparency. Contact with democratically elected representatives at local and regional levels is important. There is a knowledge of the projects at local level. Contact with non-governmental organisations has improved, and the bank' s web site has also improved. The EIB has published a list of projects at the assessment stage. In my opinion, it would be good if all the public documents from the internal evaluation unit were published on the Net.
As matters stand, the EIB is supervised by its Board of Governors, that is to say by the 15 Finance Ministers, but it lacks prudential supervision by a competent authority. The committee has discussed the possibility of letting the European Central Bank, or ECB, exercise supervision over the EIB because the EC Treaty provides for the Council to give the ECB specific tasks of prudential supervision. If the Council does not want to give the ECB this remit, the issue should be clarified at the next Intergovernmental Conference, with the objective of establishing proper prudential supervision of the EIB' s activities.
In order to improve the way in which the Bank fulfils its obligation to render accounts, the committee proposes that the external Auditors' Committee forward its findings to the European Parliament, as well as to the EIB' s Board of Governors. Mention might be made of the fact that the EIB has already shown a willingness to cooperate more closely with OLAF.
The environment is the issue which the NGOs are most interested in. These issues received much attention in the Lipietz report last year. I believe that the EIB has become more aware of environmental issues and that the Bank' s support for environmental projects has increased considerably.
Another key factor is the EIB' s environmental assessment capacity. At present, the EIB has only one person responsible for coordinating environmental issues, while the project teams are composed of engineers and economists who have received additional environmental training. In my opinion, more staff are required in this area. More trained environmental experts should be appointed or contracted to review the environmental impact assessments correctly.
There are, therefore, many demands upon the European Investment Bank. If all of these needs are to be met, it is necessary to increase the capital of the Bank. In line with what applies to commercial banks able to handle greater risks, the Member States should, for example, consider reviewing the ratio of capital borrowed by the Bank to capital of its own, with the purpose of including the EIB' s reserves.
Mr President, I should like to welcome the Commissioner to the House.
Finally, I want to comment on the amendments that have come in. I am able to support Amendments Nos 1, 3, 4 and 6 from Mr Lipietz etc. They do not change the content of the report but highlight the environmental issues and the issues concerning openness and transparency. I cannot, however, support Amendment No 2, which I find unnecessarily far-reaching. I am only able to support Amendment No 5 as a supplement to Paragraph 30.
Mr President, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur, my Swedish colleague Olle Schmidt, for a very good report. It sheds light upon the important areas of Europe' s future development, which the EIB has a major responsibility for promoting within the framework of its powers. The report also addresses the demands Parliament should make upon the EIB as Europe' s financing institution. I therefore want to confine myself to highlighting a few more of those aspects I consider to be most significant. I am thinking of the candidate countries, the way in which projects are prioritised, small and medium-sized enterprises and supervision of the EIB.
Where the candidate countries are concerned, it is extremely important that there should be a significant increase in their share of the total loans of EUR 36 billion. In 2000, they had access to EUR 2.9 billion. In view of the forthcoming enlargement of the European family, there must be an increase if it is to be possible to achieve the objective set at the Lisbon Summit.
When it comes to prioritising projects, it is important to safeguard Europe' s competitiveness and therefore prioritise infrastructure in the broad sense of the word. That applies, then, to communication not only in the traditional sense of roads, connecting links and the availability of energy-efficient transport systems for goods and people, but also in the sense of telecommunications, IT, e-commerce, education, increased knowledge and support for new technology.
Small and medium-sized enterprises at present account for more than 60 per cent of EU jobs. In an enlarged EU, they will probably account for a significantly higher percentage. Of the 18 million companies in the EU, 99% are small and medium-sized enterprises employing 66% of the workforce. More than 90% of these companies have fewer than ten employees. If, like many new companies, the existing small and medium-sized enterprises are to be given the opportunity to grow and become larger, or simply become large companies, more must be done in terms of supplying information, contributing to projects and providing access to venture capital.
The rapporteur has proposed that the Commission be called upon to give the ECB powers to exercise supervision over the EIB. I agree with that. The Bank has no national connection and cannot therefore be compared with a private commercial bank. The ECB is therefore a suitable supervisory body until such time as a possible European finance inspectorate is established.
In view of the objective set by the Lisbon Summit, priority must be given to those projects which lead to economic growth, development and increased employment in an enlarged Europe and which attach major importance to small and medium-sized enterprises' opportunities for growth. Competitiveness and staying power should be the guiding principles here.
Greater demands must be made upon the EIB in terms of providing information and evaluating projects and the importance of proper professional supervision and auditing must be emphasised.
Mr President, I do not want to comment on yesterday' s Minutes, but would like to make an observation of a different kind; so I hope you will allow me to do that first. Indeed, I understand - and I am speaking as the coordinator for my group for the ACP Meeting - that none of the Commissioners will be attending the ACP-EU Meeting in Cape Town in four weeks' time. Not one single Commissioner, not Mr Nielson, nor Mr Patten, nor Mr Lamy, nor Mr Fischler, for that matter. In order to avoid a huge disgrace, you could perhaps make an urgent appeal to the European Commission to ensure that a Commissioner attends this Meeting, for an entire programme of questions in writing and such like are on the agenda there. It is also a disgrace in respect of the 70 developing countries that the Commission is not making an effort to attend the ACP Meeting. This would be the first time that this has happened, and I have been attending ACP meetings for years. Hence my urgent request that an appeal be made to the European Commission.
I will take it up with the Commission, Mrs Maij-Weggen, and when we have the response we can come back to the House.
We come to the next item of business - and here I would like to thank the Conference of Presidents and colleagues in the House for taking a short policy statement from myself, followed by a debate, to talk a little bit about the next two and a half years of the presidency.
When I spoke after my election on 15 January I said I would like to claim the privilege which is a common privilege of the newly elected President to address the House on our strategic purpose for the coming period. In deciding to speak today it was in deference to the fact that on the Wednesday of that part-session the Spanish Prime Minister was here to launch the Spanish presidency. One thing I want to bring to this House - and I hope we will all work on this together - is an ability to communicate who we are and what we do. So when you wish to communicate something you need to pick your moment and you cannot pick a moment which on that day belongs to someone else. Thus I am availing myself of the opportunity this morning.
The great sense that I carry from the campaign which preceded my election as President is that there is an enormous appetite for change in our House. Despite that, it is a frustrated appetite in terms of the delivery of change. We need, through the different mechanisms - the Bureau, our committees, the Conference of Presidents - to convert that appetite for change into actual change on the floor of this House. My invitation to colleagues today is to seize this opportunity to create the change for which there is self-evidently such an appetite in this House.
I hope in the next period before the election that we can be a reforming parliament in a visible way and that we can be a communicating parliament and a parliament that is prepared to take risk for change. This will require creativity and imagination on the part of everyone and together we can face that challenge. In effect what I should like to invite you to address in our debate today is a willingness to engage in creating a culture of transformation. It is now more than two decades since direct elections were introduced and we need to review how we do our business. We need to create a more vital and dynamic sense of parliamentarianism on the floor of this House.
The greatest transformation in hand of course is enlargement. The time has come for us, the political class, to repossess enlargement. It is inevitably the case that the acquis communautaire requires an enormous amount of work on the part of the European Commission and on the part of the public service in the candidate states to deal with all of the detail. But surrounding that detail is the wider political challenge - and that is our challenge. This House is uniquely well-placed to lead the politics of the transformation towards an enlarged Europe.
We are now entering the end game on the enlargement debate and we have the complex budgetary proposals which no doubt the House in due course will express itself on. It is important that the era for change which is enlargement should not be reduced to a budgetary debate about small change or large change, however one may perceive that to be. We have to take initiatives in this House to drive that agenda.
I want this Parliament to be the place where the vitality of the enlargement debate plays itself out. Although the calendar is not yet firmly set, it seems to me that on two occasions this year we are likely to discuss enlargement, probably before the Seville summit at the end of the Spanish presidency and probably again in November.
I would like to ask you, especially in the political groups, to consider a formula where we can invite MPs from our political families from the candidate states to participate in our enlargement debates with us this year, to create a sense of vitality, to create a moment which is a very European moment, and to do it in terms which allow us to hear the different voices. They may be voices of accord or discord on some of the issues, but it is a really vital time and I hope the House will find within its mechanisms, and through the groups, a willingness to explore and create this platform, to express in a parliamentary sense this new Europe.
Eventually, following from the example of German reunification more than a decade ago, I would hope that the House will agree that, when the candidate states sign the accession treaties that have yet to be ratified, we might consider budgeting and planning for full observer status so that we create the avant-garde for the new Europe and that we do it in this House because it is our public purpose to give real political leadership. Subject to these details and to getting agreement - because we need to work through it as regards budgets, we need to work through it in our Bureau, we need the agreement of the Conference of Presidents on our calendar - I should like in the coming months and before the Seville summit if I can, to visit every candidate state on behalf of this Parliament and to issue to them, to our parliamentary colleagues, the formal invitation to be the avant-garde for the new Europe and, if you allow it, it will be your invitation to them and my privilege to deliver it on your behalf.
(Applause) In the context of foreign policy and on a wider basis I hope in a number of ways that we can up our game. Europe needs a new foreign policy and I am certain in this House there is a majority and a will to create that foreign policy. In forming and developing strategic partnerships with the United States, with Russia, with a Euro-Mediterranean dialogue, with a dialogue of civilisations, we are engaging in politics that are vital not just to the parliamentary process which is the image of the European Union itself. In this House we have great credibility in terms of our appetite to fight global poverty, disease and famine. In this House we have a wonderful and proud record in the promotion and defence of human rights. We must be determined to continue to play a leading role in this but we must find new platforms to express our leadership. It is not simply that we need to follow events but we ourselves, as a Parliament, have the capacity to create new platforms to offer a lead.
In the last few days and weeks, thanks to the work of so many colleagues in the House, we have begun to move towards a new and more mature form of political relations with other institutions and in particular with the European Commission. I congratulate Mrs Malmstrm in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Vice-President of the Commission, who is here today, for the work which they have done in securing a landmark high-quality agreement on how we will go about the legislative process from now on. We need it and the work is excellent.
I congratulate the House for the overwhelming vote of support yesterday for the report by Mr von Wogau which will allow us to adopt an effective interim solution - and it is only an interim solution - on the financial services reform pending, through the Convention, and through the Intergovernmental Conference, a new basis in the Treaty on which to conduct our institutional relations, on which to promote the role of a democratic Europe and on which to promote this Parliament's role in representing citizens in a vital way.
I would like in particular also to pay tribute, because these two reports have come through the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, to the leadership role and qualities of Mr Napolitano whose work in this House has contributed so handsomely to these achievements.
The thread of consistency in all of these measures is the primacy of politics itself. That is our business. We also have to give a signal to the Commission, to the Council, to the wider world, that we in the European Parliament are mature and reliable partners in the project that we share in terms of European integration.
The counterpart is that I want to work now in the lead-up to the Barcelona European Council, with the Commission and with the Council, to get a meaningful interinstitutional working group. The primacy of politics comes to zero if the platforms to develop politics are not there. I say this to the Council: the time has now come for it, with the Commission and Parliament, to deliver that platform and to give us the ability to restore and to develop the primacy of politics, to prepare ourselves for common work on the Convention and for successful and common outcomes of substance in the Intergovernmental Conference.
We must not forget also that we here in this House are a tribune of the peoples of Europe. Our essential public purpose is to serve our citizens. We can create and we can communicate a new pride in this Parliament. Our determination must be to accentuate the democratic over the technocratic, to insist on openness and to connect our message in every way we can with a wider European public.
I am very proud of the fact that it was on the floor of this Parliament that we, the parliamentarians, created, developed, explained and won the argument in favour of a Convention, in favour of a new way of creating the new Europe, in favour of an open and democratic and transparent way, in favour of trying to get in touch with a rising generation of Europeans who are untouched by business behind closed doors. The old permissive consent to allow the elite to proceed is no longer there in the old way and so we must earn the consent and respect of a rising generation. We can only do it through open methods and the Convention must be an open method and can be a very significant start.
Parliament can claim an ownership of the idea. But we also have a key role as a stakeholder in this Convention. Our determination as Parliament is to promote the democratic Europe over the technocratic Europe and to insist on openness. In that regard, it is my view - and later today we have the possibility in the Conference of Presidents to meet the President of the Convention - that we must ensure as a Parliament that the Convention itself in its open work is the primary platform, is the main way, is the open discussion that leads to the way forward.
It is important - and we have distinguished colleagues on the praesidium to help to lead this debate - that this is a well-managed Convention. But its management must assist the Convention itself to be a real platform for open debate. I have asked the services here, in terms of connecting this debate to the wider public, to ensure that it is broadcast on a continuous basis on video-streaming, so that those who wish to follow - whether they are journalists, people working in research institutes, students in universities, different groups in the socio-economic sphere in Europe - but who are not in Brussels for its work, can do so on a regular basis.
Colleagues, we still have a long way to go on the question of internal reform. I read the book Mes combats produced by my predecessor Nicole Fontaine. She spoke in it about the Members' Statute and about the virtual impossibility of making progress on that issue.
I do not know what progress we can make but I express this hope today. I would like to bring closure to the Members' Statute. I want to work with the rapporteur, Mr Rothley; I want to work with key colleagues in the Bureau and the College of Quaestors. But firstly I want to talk to Members in this House to try to develop, mobilise and motivate a majority for change. Over the coming weeks, we will engage in an intensive round of consultation with Members. There will be no statute over the head of Members - I give you that guarantee. But there can be no statute without mobilising the majority - first in here. Then, of course, even if we do that, we still have to rely on the Council to deliver its part of the contract. But I want to start the first phase right here: to know the ground we stand on, to create a clear will for this change and then to try to bring closure to it. It is politically important to do so before the next European elections. I hope you agree and I hope you will help to create that climate for a majority for change.
Mr President, with regard to yesterday' s vote on the Olsson report, Paragraph 1, second part, states that I abstained from the vote. I actually voted against. I would appreciate it if this were corrected.
We take note of how you voted, which will be corrected.
Due to an error, the proposals of the Conference of Presidents on the appointment of Members of Parliament to bureaux of delegations to joint parliamentary committees do not appear in yesterday' s Minutes and they will, therefore, be included in today' s.
Mr President, I wish, on the record, to thank France and Belgium for the guard on the buildings having now been markedly stepped up.
Thank you, Mr Rbig. We take note of your observation.
Mr President, at the last sitting, we were all horrified at the possibility that Safiya Husseini might be executed in Nigeria. I was going to ask for the floor, but Mr Corrie asked for it and I felt that he was representing me when he asked the President to intervene.
There is currently a mobilisation in my country, because it appears that the execution has been brought forward to this Saturday. This horrifies us even more, because the case of this woman, like that of many others, is a display of savagery. It is horrendous that a woman is going to be executed for having had a daughter, which is her fifth child, whatever the circumstances of the child' s birth. We should make a final effort to prevent this execution which the authorities have brought forward to this Saturday in an attempt to avoid the international pressure on them not to carry out what I consider to be a murder.
Mr President, I would ask you to make the appropriate representations.
Mrs Gonzlez, the whole House shares your feelings and, as far as our institution is able, we will take all possible measures to ensure that such an atrocity cannot be carried out.
Mr President, I should like to make a comment on today' s agenda. It strikes me that today' s debates will finish around 5.30 p.m., while the votes will not start until 6.30 p.m. We have had this situation for a long time now. It means that for many of the Members, it is just too late to return home at the end of the debate, and they therefore have to stay on until tomorrow, or return home sooner. In my view, it is an excellent thing that we are here, even if we have to burn the midnight oil as far as I am concerned, if we have something to discuss. If that is not the case, then we should not be required to sit here drinking coffee for an hour. I would therefore ask you if you could perhaps put it to the President to see whether this problem can be solved in such a manner that Members need not at any rate stay on any longer than is necessary.
Yes, Mr Maaten, but we have an agenda established. Within the bounds of this agenda, we will try to take your concerns into account as far as possible.
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0022/2002) by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on EU policy towards Mediterranean countries in relation to the promotion of women's rights and equal opportunities in these countries (2001/2129(INI)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is a political vision and a vital project for the EU. But it is not just a sound method of promoting its economic interests; the main objective is to create an area of peace, security, stability and prosperity.
The history of European unification teaches us that, unless there is prosperity for all, men and women alike, there can be no zone of peace and stability. At present, the role of women in this process of cooperation is marginal or focused on the economic sector, with negligible results as regards improving their standard of living, whereas our committee believes that such a political vision should consider women to be instrumental in promoting cohesion, peace and sustainable development.
The aim of this own initiative report is to assess policy to date, to urge the European Union to implement all the necessary policies to promote the social, political and economic rights of women in the Mediterranean and to urge the partner countries to assume their responsibilities and rise to the challenges inherent in this objective by all possible means. Assessing the situation is no easy task, because there are considerable variations from one country to another. There is a lack of statistical data broken down by gender, an absence of studies by the European Commission and the national governments effectively evaluating the impact of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation on the promotion of women' s rights and a special regional Mediterranean programme has yet to be applied.
I hereby declare resumed the session adjourned on Thursday, 7 February 2002.
It is my duty today with the support of all the Members of this House and particularly with the support of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy to express on behalf of the European Parliament our deep concern at the kidnapping of a parliamentarian and candidate in the forthcoming presidential elections in Colombia, Mrs Ingrid Betancourt, a kidnapping by the so-called Revolutionary Armed Forces of the Columbian People's Army FARC.
The European Parliament unreservedly condemns such attacks on innocent civilians and interference in this way in an electoral process. As President, I appeal to the perpetrators to immediately release Mrs Ingrid Betancourt, the five other parliamentarians being held hostage and the 40 civilians who have been kidnapped in the recent past and are still being held in illegal captivity. Furthermore, I remind the kidnappers that it is especially inhuman to hold hostages who are in a precarious state of health and that these should be released immediately on humanitarian grounds.
Members will recall our strong support following the statement to plenary by President Pastrana on Tuesday, 26 October 1999 for the peace process in Colombia expressing numerous resolutions on 'Plan Colombia' . The European Parliament regrets all the more the breakdown in the peace process negotiations and the recent resumption of hostilities and calls on the parties concerned to resume their search for a democratic and negotiated settlement for peace in Colombia.
Parliament expresses its solidarity with the families of the hostages and with the people of Colombia.
Mr President, thank you for that statement. We will send someone to Colombia to see what we can do as a European Group and we hope, within a few weeks, to have a different option than simply to deplore that our candidate has been kidnapped.
Mr President, I would like to draw my fellow Members' attention to the gathering, which is taking place right now opposite the Parliament building, of some 3 000 men and women from France, Italy, Belgium and elsewhere. They are calling on Europe to do everything in its power to bring about an equitable peace in the Middle East, in the spirit of the resolution that we ourselves adopted at our last part-session. I think that we must welcome this gathering, firstly because it is healthy, when we are discussing the future of Europe, to see so many people demonstrating to urge Europe to fulfil its role as a world player. And also because this is a demonstration for peace, justice and human dignity in the light of an appalling tragedy, which requires us to make an exceptional effort. I welcome the fact that most groups have agreed to hold discussions with the citizens' delegations; this is promising. I think that the next step should now be to send, as we decided, an official delegation from Parliament to the Palestinian territories and to Israel, and also, once there, to organise a visit to Europe by President Arafat.
Mrs Pack, I understand that you wish to make a request concerning the agenda for Thursday.
Mr President, on behalf of all members of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, I would like to make a heartfelt plea that we should not, as planned, have a combined debate on culture, education and youth on Thursday morning, as these three topics should not be thrown together. There may well be points of contact between them, but they need to be dealt with separately. I ask that these three topics be dealt with in the same time as set aside for the joint debate, and I believe that this is something that this House would support.
Let me then make a proposal which the House in its wisdom is at liberty to accept or reject. In the light of this request I propose taking the three reports from the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport in separate debates.
Mr President, you proposed a change to the agenda based on the Council' s availability, which, of course, we understand. Basically, your proposal is to take Mr MacCormick' s reports on the waiver of parliamentary immunity now and, whatever the quality of the work by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, which gave its opinion on the two reports last week, we believe that the time we have been given to examine the two requests for the waiver of parliamentary immunity might be insufficient. We also believe, in the interests of holding a good debate, in order for our parliamentary democracy and the essential procedure of parliamentary immunity to function properly, in order for us all to be able to give our honest opinion, having had the opportunity to examine all the documents and in order that we do not give poorly informed opinions, that it would have been better to place the two reports on the agenda of the Strasbourg part-session. I hope that the House can support us in this decision.
Rule 6(6) is very clear: "The report of the committee shall be placed at the head of the agenda of the first sitting following the day on which it was tabled". Under the Rules I am suggesting the correct procedure today. The rule itself is very clear and it does not seem to fall within the discretion of the President or, at this moment, of the House itself, to alter that rule.
I understand and appreciate the point you make about political preparation but it seems to me that this must remain on our order of business in order to respect the Rules of Procedure.
Mr President, this change to the agenda was not taken into account when you made your proposal. This change is directly related to the Council' s availability. Until now, it has always been customary to examine waivers for parliamentary immunity at the Strasbourg part-sessions. I understand perfectly well, therefore, that we placed this issue at the head of Monday' s agenda, but I do not think this was what was intended, especially after last week' s vote by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Madam Bers I made the suggestion to take the McCormick report at 4 p.m. because of the lack of availability of the President-in-Office, not on the assumption that the reports would not have been taken today.
Mr President, Members of the House need no telling how useful to us the publication Recent and Forthcoming Work in Committee is. It gives us a way to plan forward.
A week ago I was asked by a colleague who works as an advisor to the Scottish Parliament if there was anyway I could help her with the problem of foreseeing business coming forward in the European Parliament in order that committees of that other parliament should be aware of our work and able to plan in relation to it. I said that there was a marvellous publication and I would get it for her. My staff asked for it in Parliament this week and I asked the Parliament office in Edinburgh if they could provide it. I was informed that this is a rare work of which Members of Parliament get one copy each and which may not be copied for anyone else, and no further copies can be obtained. In these days of transparency in the conduct of our business, it seems to me that is a provision which ought to be re-examined. This very useful publication should be made widely available.
A second point: Yesterday, we approved minutes which drew attention to Mrs Doyle's statement of Thursday, 7 February, that in respect of the Watson report the PPE-ED Group by mistake failed to vote in favour of the habeas corpus amendment. Had they not made that mistake because of a late change in numbering, that amendment would have been carried in Parliament. This is a momentous fact which I hope will be drawn to the attention of Commissioner Vitorino, the President-in-Office of the Council and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi as chair of the relevant committee of this House.
We have taken note of your second point, Mr MacCormick.
With regard to the first point, I believe that the President of Parliament intends to give one of the Vice-Presidents responsibility for supervising relations with the citizens and for transparency and communication between Parliament and the citizens. It has not yet been decided which Vice-President but I think he or she may be the person you should contact regarding the matter you have raised.
The next item is the report (A5-0021/2002) by Mrs Pack, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the implementation of the Socrates programme [2000/2315(INI)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the first thing that must be said is that Socrates is a success story. Education was successful under Erasmus, but I think that, embedded in the Socrates programme, it has fared even better. That is one positive finding in this evaluation of the second stage of the European Union programme on general education. Socrates takes account of the concept of lifelong learning and supports mobility at all stages of learning, of students and teachers alike. To put it one way, Socrates is there for us from the cradle to the grave.
The Commission has taken precautions and measures, one step at a time, to improve the content of the programme. I welcome ongoing efforts to speed up procedures and cut red tape. Red tape is inevitable in a government programme at any level, but red tape should not be an obstacle to this sort of education programme and should not obstruct its objectives. The Commission has taken account of this premise on numerous counts. I shall come shortly to the areas in which it has not.
As rapporteur on both the introduction of the first phase and the implementation of the current second stage of the Socrates programme, I am satisfied how well it has developed. The figures for the first half of the programme speak for themselves. In 31 countries - that is, the 15 Member States, the candidate countries and the members of the European Economic Area - 2 000 universities, 40 000 university lecturers and more than 460 000 students took part in further education exchanges under Erasmus alone. Comenius, the section for schools, funded 15 000 schools with over 2 million pupils. I think we really are reaching our citizens here and I think it really is worth our while to continue and, if possible, build up this programme even more.
This being so, the increase in the multiannual budget from the original figure of EUR 850 million to a current EUR 933 million - achieved by Parliament during all-night sittings - was the right thing to do. But, to be honest, it is not enough. If new candidate countries join in 2004 - the programme runs until 2007 - then this programme needs to be built up. And if the Council of Ministers refuses to do so, then all I can say is that its declarations at the summits are nothing more than hot air and I think the Commissioner should point out as much to the ministers at forthcoming Council meetings.
Of course, I also have a few criticisms to make. Several initiatives still have room for improvement when it comes to the nitty-gritty. First, the Commission should improve and speed up cooperation with national agencies even more. Centralisation has huge advantages but requires effective information management. The Symmetry system developed by the Commission will clearly facilitate the flow of information to and from the national agencies here. But at the same time, we can - and it makes sense to - link up with the Youth and Leonardo da Vinci programmes. Symmetry therefore needs to be introduced as quickly as possible.
Secondly, I would point out that an overwhelming number of national agencies gave me to understand that the Commission is helpful at all stages. But the time taken to prepare new contracts has resulted in disgraceful delays in payments, especially under Comenius. Such obstacles must be removed because hold-ups and delays are a source of frustration to committed participants. Especially in schools, where a great deal of extra effort goes into setting up projects. I know of schools where the teachers running the project are smiled upon by their colleagues. They do it in their spare time and do not get paid a penny more.
Thirdly, I also expect something to be done about creating joint actions, especially with the other programmes I mentioned.
Fourthly, I also call on the Commission to adopt the premise: the smaller the sum, the less red tape. I think we could follow the example set by the Commission with the partnership agreements, that is, to deal with applications under 20 000 differently, without the mound of paperwork needed for larger sums. I also think that the cofinancing requirement should be dropped below EUR 20 000.
The fundamental contribution of Socrates to a European education area has been applauded repeatedly and is beyond question. We should not forget that Socrates is the heartbeat of a European society of knowledge and learning and what worries me is that transnational, that is, intergovernmental cooperation on education might displace the Community approach. However, the Bologna and Prague declarations were in favour of these supposedly faster methods. We must not forget that the means and ends of the so-called open method of cooperation with the Member States on education would have been more or less unthinkable without the positive experience gained from Socrates. To sacrifice Community education objectives to short-term transnational cooperation would be an unspeakable step backwards.
To close, we need to bear two further points in mind. First, Socrates is an important, decisive European programme, because it educates people in Europe and is the European answer to the education prospects of the future.
Secondly, the open method of intergovernmental cooperation must not be allowed to undermine the importance of the Community approach.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Socrates, together with a number of other programmes, really is the European Union programme which builds Europe from the bottom up because, as Doris Pack has already told us, this programme allows generations of young people to experience Europe for themselves and gain a European perspective which stays with them for the rest of their personal and professional lives.
That is why it is vital for Parliament to take the Council and Commission to task during these procedures and, of course, to make its own contribution. I should therefore like to address two points on which I would be grateful for the backing of other committees, especially the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control.
The first point is the question of decentralisation. It has proven its worth, but the national agencies have a counterpart in Brussels; in future, this role will be filled by the executive agencies. We will need to work with these executive agencies as well as we have worked, thankfully, with the national agencies. So I urge the Commission and the Committee on Budgetary Control to create the conditions for such cooperation during consultations concerning these executive agencies.
My second point is the question of financial control. We also need the support of the Committee on Budgetary Control if we really are to achieve the objective of awarding small sums in aid without incurring high administrative costs. The Commission should be given the necessary support here through Parliament in general and the Committee on Budgetary Control in particular.
Mr President, Commissioner, we have heard a great deal of praise for the Socrates programme and I have no wish to go over it all again. I should just like to point out that around 40% of the 376 million people living in the European Union are under 30 years old, making them one of the biggest target groups of the Socrates programme, as well as Grundtvig, Minerva, Media Plus and other such programmes.
So the programme has the chance to make its mark over coming years by promoting mobility, intercultural education and educational diversity. It is on the right track for improvement, as we can see from the second stage and as we have just heard. But the weaknesses in the system also need to be pointed out. They include delays in preparing contracts between the Commission and the national agencies, which keep addressing the problems and which keep being hampered during implementation by delays. The same applies to delays in paying out assistance, because when only small sums are involved, the beneficiaries need to receive them as quickly as possible and the pre-financing stage needs to be shortened because, in addition to doing the work, they generally have to pre-finance the projects as well.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 28 February 2002.
The final draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 7 March under Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed.
I have received a request from the Socialist Group to bring forward to Tuesday the report by Mr Trentin (A5-0062/2002) on the broad economic policy guidelines currently scheduled for Wednesday.
Mr President, this proposal is based on your wise counsel, on your proposal that Parliament should organise debates that are comprehensible. And the logical thing would be, if we are holding a debate on budgetary guidelines, to also debate the broad guidelines for economic policy.
However, in the current situation, it seems that the debate on the Trentin report has been squeezed in and I believe it would make much more sense to hold it on Tuesday. This is the only reason, Mr President.
Mr President, I really did not understand that. I really do crave your indulgence. The outcome, according to the translation, was that the subject is going to be debated on Wednesday, but, if I understand rightly, it is meant to be debated on Tuesday. Could we perhaps clarify this again? It was not, in any case, entirely clear in the German translation.
The request is to move it from Wednesday to Tuesday.
Mr President, the reason for this request is not a political reason, to do with any one group. The President, as Mr Poettering well knows, since he was with me in the seminar that he invited us to, insists that we should hold comprehensible debates. Well, if we are going to hold a debate on the Union's budget, the obvious thing is also to debate the broad guidelines for economic policy. That is the only reason. There is nothing else behind this proposal.
I hope Mr Poettering does not have a cold, since he is well wrapped up at the moment. I hope he is feeling alright.
Mr President, for the sake of clarifying the proceedings, let me say that our group is very committed on the issue of Chechnya, and if, today, we support the motion to remove the topic from the agenda for this week's part-session, that does not mean that we are not going to continue to be committed on the issue. We want first to await the visit of a parliamentary delegation to Moscow and then return to this topic in an in-depth debate in May at the latest. I would like to make that explicit today. We remain committed on this issue and our attention is entirely focused on Chechnya. If, then, we are in favour of removing this topic from the agenda for this sitting, that does not mean that our commitment to the issue is any the less.
Mr President, first of all, I would like to thank you for calling me two weeks ago, on the third day of my hunger strike for Chechnya. This is now the 18th day of my hunger strike. I think that the reasons that Mr Poettering has just given do not hold water. I think that Parliament is being held hostage to a few Stalinists, who always take a strong line with those who are weak and are weak in the face of those who are strong. We would like to withdraw the resolution on Chechnya from the agenda because the delegation to Russia is due to visit Moscow in April to meet the Russian members of the delegation. I think that the delegation must go there armed with an extremely clear and strong position on an issue which has been dragging on for two and a half years, during which time 150 000 people have died and 400 000 refugees have been created out of a population of one million. I therefore urge my Socialist friends, and I do have some, not just Mr Sakellariou, and my friends in the Group of the European People's Party not to indefinitely prolong a tragedy that is very much a tragedy of the present and the past but not necessarily of the future.
Mr President, I want to tell Mr Poettering that I am in absolute agreement with the proposal he has made. I do think that, if we want to have a proper debate on Chechnya, we must not have it as a matter of urgency with one or two minutes available, but in the context of a statement on this issue by the Council and the Commission, so we could have a serious discussion about it. Apart from that, I do not wish to respond to the constant attacks by Mr Dupuis and his crowd, such as, for example, Mr Pannella and the rest of them.
Mr President, in my opinion, saying that there are other ways to deal with a matter besides holding a topical and urgent debate is a fundamental problem, for every time we say this - and who knows why - the committees responsible do nothing at all.
I feel that it is very important that this topical and urgent debate, already agreed on previously by the groups, be held in this particular part-session, in which, not least, a number of initiatives on Chechnya are being presented by different groups, and concurrently with which 400-500 people are on a hunger strike for Chechnya. Moreover, I do not feel that this decision to hold a topical and urgent debate now means that we will have another opportunity to discuss the matter in a month or so. If that were the case, we might perhaps be able to agree to the debate being cancelled now, but, I am sad to say, according to past precedent, that is extremely unlikely, which is why I strongly urge the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats to fulfil their undertaking given last week.
Mr President, I wish to make one thing clear: my group did not actually want to ask for the removal of this item, but we were informed that the PSE Group had asked for it and then we said, very well,?
Just listen for a moment! I always listen to you. So we said that, in order to have a large majority in this House and to remain committed to the topic, we favour removing it for this week, but finding in the immediate future an appropriate procedure in order that we may get to grips with this topic in a way it very much deserves, with the Council and the Commission present if necessary. It is only on this basis that we are in favour of dealing with this topic, not as a matter of urgency this week, but at a later juncture and in a far more appropriate format. That is the condition we impose.
I declare open the annual session of the European Parliament for the year 2002-2003.
I have received a request for a topical and urgent debate on the Council's proposal to change the legal basis for the European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation (?EC) No 218/92 on administrative cooperation in the field of indirect taxation (VAT) [C5-0103/2002 - 2000/0147(COD)].
Mr President, two years ago the Commission presented two proposed modifications, one of the sixth directive and the other of the Regulation on administrative cooperation. The aim of both was to end the discrimination suffered by European companies in comparison with those of third countries, particularly American ones, in terms of the provision of services. This discrimination is due to the fact that companies from outside the Union do not pay value-added tax when they provide electronic services, while European companies are obliged to pay it.
Since this is an urgent issue, Parliament produced two reports very quickly. At the moment, the Council are asking us for a change to the legal basis exclusively for the Regulation on administrative cooperation. I am not going to expand on this issue, but I wish to say they are two different things.
The Committee believes that we should not proceed with the change of legal basis, but that the issue should be studied with the greatest urgency, in order to put an end to this discrimination and, furthermore, as Parliament has requested, in order to facilitate the use of electronic means for identifying clients, putting an end to the costs which are faced in particular by small and medium-sized businesses.
I would therefore advise the House to accept the Council's request in relation to the urgency procedure, and not accept the change of legal basis in relation to this issue. It is one thing to deny a material request and quite another to deny it an urgency procedure so that these two proposals can be implemented very quickly.
Mr President, the information on the vote on request for urgent procedure on administrative cooperation was not supplied to me in due time, or rather, it was not delivered at all, and, for that reason, I am unable to vote in favour of it.
Mr Ilgenfritz, I appreciate your request. However, I can tell you that Parliament's services have been trying to get the translation since last night. If you insist, we shall have to postpone the vote until the relevant document has been distributed in every language.
Last night, I attended the coordinators' meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. It is unfortunate that the chair, Mrs Randzio-Plath, is not here today. Otherwise, I am certain that she would have told you that the meeting of coordinators last night decided to advise against urgent procedure. The reason for that is that the Council would like to decide on this matter before 1 July, which leaves us plenty of time, even if we do not decide on urgent procedure today. It can be discussed reasonably quickly, but there is no need at all for urgent procedure. It is, indeed, correct that the legal basis still causes some difficulty, but we can discuss this in due course. The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs therefore advises against urgent procedure.
Mr President, I want to raise a point of order on a very serious matter dealing with Scotch whisky. A year ago, this Parliament selected two whiskies to be put on sale to Members of Parliament, to visitors and to people visiting our shops in Brussels and Strasbourg with Parliament's own label and own brand placed on the bottles. The College of Quaestors has agreed all of the conditions necessary for having these whiskies placed on sale in our shops, yet the Administration is still blocking their sale in our shops. This is a serious matter because it raises the question of who runs this Parliament - the Members or the Administration? I would ask you, Mr President, to intervene in this matter to ensure that the request of the College of Quaestors taken on behalf of the Members is carried out and that these branded whiskies are placed on sale in our shops.
Thank you very much, Mr Stevenson. May I assure you that the Quaestors will look into the matter tomorrow on the basis of what you have just said.
Mr President, yesterday, in one of the Palestinian refugee camps, Ariel Sharon's troops killed twenty-two people. I do not know whether to feel horror or shame at the Israeli Government's treatment of the Palestinians, which reminds me of the treatment the Jews themselves received in Europe 60 years ago.
I believe this must end and that the President of Parliament should lodge a protest and condemn such acts.
Thank you very much, Mr Nogueira Romn. Your comments have, of course, been noted and will be examined by the relevant parliamentary committees.
Mr President, on the issue which Mr Nogueira has just mentioned, I would like to refer to an issue which affects this House even more directly. As the House knows, a few days ago a special representative of the European Union - the institution to which this Parliament belongs - Mr Moratinos, was detained against his will for some minutes at the residence of President Arafat, due to the bombing of that residence by Israeli troops.
Mr President, I would ask you to communicate this Parliament's indignation to the Spanish Presidency of the Council at this blatant aggression against a diplomatic representative of the European Union in the fulfilment of his duties, while he was in Palestine with the President of the Palestinian Authority, something which the Israeli authorities had prior knowledge of, as the honourable Members and the President know.
Thank you. You may be sure that your comments will be passed to the proper authorities.
Mr President, yesterday the Group of the Party of European Socialists requested the deletion of Chechnya from the subjects for topical and urgent debate on the basis that it is an urgent subject of major importance, to be dealt with when the time comes, which I hope it will. Today, the political position of Parliament on a very serious, extremely important situation that cannot be resolved is being presented as a point of order. Naturally, we are all sorry that Mr Moratinos was present when these events took place. We are all aware of the situation in the Middle East, which deserves an in-depth discussion, not just a point of order and request to the President. I therefore invite you, Mr President, to ask that a debate take place, if necessary, but not this type of attitude asking the presidency to do things that, under other circumstances, we do not want Parliament to do.
Before turning to the topic of this morning's debate I should like to make a brief statement in the presence of the President-in-Office of the Council on the grave developments in the Middle East over the past several days.
We have been watching with growing disbelief the violence and reciprocal atrocities that have plumbed new depths of horror in recent days. Military operations have now reached levels unknown in two decades. The region, and especially Israel and the Palestinian Territories, seem to be edging frighteningly and inexorably towards an all-out conflagration.
We have a responsibility in our Parliament in this unfolding tragedy to do anything that we can to prevent the holy places being transformed into killing fields. We must actively support the unanimous call yesterday evening by the United Nations Security Council for an immediate ceasefire. The EU's High Representative knows that our Parliament stands squarely behind him in his efforts in favour of peace and for a ceasefire.
Equally, I would like to take this opportunity this morning to place on the public record our Parliament's deep debt to the personal courage and unshakeable commitment of the European Union envoy, Mr Moratinos. He may not thank me for saying this, but I had the opportunity to speak to him at length yesterday about his diplomatic efforts on our behalf to keep channels of communication open with all sides. He is, for Europe, one of our unsung heroes.
I want to pledge to this House to take any action on behalf of Parliament which has a chance of promoting peace and of trying to draw this region back from the edge. I have taken steps to invite Mr Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat to seek to break that infernal cycle of violence by inviting them to come to address this House. I hope they will be in a position to take up this offer. We would welcome them as champions of peace through the hardest of times.
I, in cooperation with Mr Solana and the good offices of the Spanish Presidency, remain open to the suggestion to travel to Ramallah with the Knesset speaker, Avraham Burg and to meet there with Abu Ala in the Palestinian Legislative Council should circumstances permit.
Because the risk is looming of an all-out conflagration we have to do whatever we can. In the name of this Parliament, for humanity's sake, the essential appeal I want to make this morning is: please stop the violence, start the dialogue and give peace a chance.
Mr President, I should like to congratulate you on having made this statement, which is proof that you are fulfilling your duty. My group invited two high-profile speakers, one Palestinian and one Israeli, to address us here last night and they described life in reoccupied Ramallah. They told us how the camps were being bombed and also described the horrors of the attacks in Jerusalem. They told us how the city of Ramallah was plunged into darkness and bombed at the very moment when President Arafat was receiving Mr Moratinos, and how bombs fell just a few metres from where they were meeting.
I think that you were right just now to recall our decision to invite President Arafat and Mr Peres. I believe that you are right to remind us of this and to extend the invitation. We also decided to send a high-level delegation to the area; this was Parliament's wish.
I suggest that we act on this decision and that this delegation be a high-level one, comprising, for example, the presidents of our groups or even Parliament's President.
Mr President, I must first assure you of the Socialist Group's support for your statement. I would also like to express our support for the resolution adopted by the United Nations Security Council. The latter represents a turning point in history because, for the first time, explicit reference is made to the need to recognise a Palestinian state, as advocated by the European Union.
I believe it should be emphasised that the UN, the European Union, the United Sates and Russia need to work together if we are to find a light to guide us out of the darkness of the current conflict in the Middle East. This message should go out loud and clear, Mr President of the Council, particularly because it is important for the Council of Ministers to present a united front on this matter, and support the work of our representative in the Middle East. Parliament made its views clear through the resolution adopted by an overwhelming majority in the February plenary. I believe it is now time for the Council to act likewise and agree on a common approach it could wholeheartedly support. It might then be possible to move forward and break the present infernal cycle of violence.
All that remains for me to say, Mr President, is that the initiatives you proposed and which were also part of our resolution, do reflect our common desire.
Mr President, our group, too, thanks you for your statement, and we are right alongside you as regards a peace settlement, or the attempt at one, in the Middle East. This debate is not about the Middle East, as we want to discuss enlargement, but it is our profound conviction that we will be successful in the fight against terrorism only if we, that is the United States of America and the European Union, support the peace process between Israel and Palestine with equal determination and in the same way, something on which there could be stronger signals from the West, to which we belong. I am much obliged to you for your initiative.
Mr President, I should simply like to thank you for your words and say that, if ever a delegation did go to Ramallah and Jerusalem, I hope that it would be able to meet not only representatives of the institutions but also some representatives of civil society in Palestine and Israel, because I believe that peace will only be restored in the Middle East if civil society is mobilised.
Mr President, I should like, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, to thank you for your support and for what you have said today. We are in a dreadful situation in which people are being killed every day in these areas: children, young people, the elderly, the innocent. Moreover, we must do everything to support you and, as a Parliament, call upon the other parties to do something. I think, however, that it is important that, as elected representatives of the people, we take this task upon ourselves and, at this time, express sympathy, as well as the horror and fear that we feel.
I thank colleagues for the endorsement of that statement and of the possible initiatives that we might take.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on enlargement and we are very pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Piqu i Camps is here today to lead this debate.
Mr President, before turning to enlargement, which is the topic of today's debate, I should like, if I may, to say a few words on the situation in the Middle East. Firstly, I wish to endorse the statement you just made. It is entirely appropriate and has my full support.
We have long been involved in intense political and diplomatic activity aimed at finding a solution to the current situation in the Middle East and to the violence spiralling out of control in the region.
As is well known, the approach adopted by the European Union and the Council is based on the firm belief that there can be no military solution to the conflict. I feel we are all agreed on that. A peace process is therefore the only option, and that process must involve the peaceful coexistence of two states in the region. On the one hand, there is the State of Israel, with internationally recognised borders and the right to feel secure, and on the other a Palestinian State that needs to be viable in every sense, especially as regards its political, economic, social and territorial dimensions.
Madam President, Commissioner, I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for adopting this report by unanimity. In addition, I should like to recall Parliament's considerable institutional support to the nuts and locust beans sector. This is evidenced in a number of resolutions testifying to the significance of this sector within the Union.
At the Council of Agriculture Ministers in July 2001, Commissioner Fischler announced that a detailed study of the Community nuts sector would be undertaken. The Commissioner also stated that if appropriate, specific proposals to benefit the sector would be made, to follow on from the improvement plans expiring in 2001.
In the light of this situation, the Commission has proposed an additional one-year extension of the improvement plans. I have certainly welcomed this. Nonetheless, I would like to make it clear that I trust it will be the last transitional instrument, to be followed by a permanent proposal. Such a proposal must ensure the survival of the sector and put an end to the difficulties and uncertainty European Union producers are experiencing.
The main aim of our report was to settle the issue of permanent support measures once and for all. The nuts sector is very important to the Union from a social, economic and environmental point of view. Over a million hectares are devoted to these crops. They extend across the Mediterranean countries, and the land is mostly located in very disadvantaged areas where agriculture is difficult. Much of the soil is hillside or arid.
These products therefore have to overcome many difficulties to remain on the market and be economically viable without direct support from public institutions. The difficulties are exacerbated by strong outside competition. For instance, there are hazelnuts from Turkey and almonds from the United States. In both cases the conditions of production bear no comparison to those in Europe. In addition, the outside products benefit from tariff concessions under international agreements.
The nuts sector is an example of multifunctional production and is essential to the socio-economic survival of many families in rural areas of the Union. This is because of its role in regional planning, since no alternative crops exist, and also because of its part in environmental conservation. It helps prevent erosion and is important in combating fires. It also preserves indigenous genetic material, which is of great organolectic value.
In the light of this difficult situation and lack of competitiveness in 1989, the Commission adopted a package of specific measures. These were aimed mainly at raising the quality and competitiveness of the products. The ten-year improvement plans were due to expire in 2000 but were extended until 15 July 2001.
The results of the plans proved positive. There were notable improvements in production and marketing. Unfortunately the same was not true of competitiveness, due to the difficult structural conditions at the outset. The Commission's present proposal would allow these last plans to be extended to 15 June 2002 with the Community contribution decreasing from 82 to 75%.
Taking the specific case of hazelnuts, the payment per kilo is retained for the 2001-2002 harvest. Payments will only be made, however, to members of producer organisations not eligible for the extension. The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has attempted to introduce considerable improvements to the executive committee's proposal through its amendment.
Regarding the restrictions on support for hazelnut production, we believe that it is not acceptable to withhold it from those producer organisations wishing to benefit from the extension of improvement schemes. This would amount to discrimination between producers' organisations, giving some of them an unfair advantage.
As for the level of national cofinancing, the increase on the current commitment proposed for the extended plans cannot be justified. In this connection, the percentage relating to nuts is minimal and does not justify the proposal. As for the areas covered by the plans and entitled to aid, the percentage should be retained on the basis of the area certified in the last year's plans and not the area for which aid has been requested.
The Committee on Agriculture is of the opinion that in order to improve awareness and production monitoring, provision must be made to set up a geographical information system. The committee is also on record as advocating the need to establish a permanent framework for aid to the sector. Further, the committee has argued for ongoing support in the form of aid per hectare to guarantee maintenance of the producers' income in a situation of sustainable exploitation. Hence the advisability of linking this latest extension to permanent aid, the ultimate aim being to consolidate a system of ongoing aid channelled through the producer organisations.
I must not conclude without mentioning the Committee on Agriculture's specific request that chestnuts be included in the nuts sector. The protection of this tree and fruit associated with forested areas and ancient culinary traditions is crucial to preserving a very important ecosystem that is obviously being encroached upon. It also has a bearing on the related environmental issues. Finally, I should like to point out that two identical amendments have been put to plenary. They both aim at increasing support to hazelnuts by means of an additional marketing season.
I am unable to support these amendments although I appreciate and share concerns over the difficulties currently experienced in marketing hazelnuts. The request for a permanent regime implies that support to hazelnuts would be covered by that regime. It is therefore not appropriate to extend still further a temporary arrangement with a set expiry date that has merely generated uncertainty.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I trust we shall be able to continue enjoying the best desserts, the best nougat, and all those products manufactured with the best and most delicious hazelnuts and almonds in the world.
Madam President, Commissioner, I should first like to warmly congratulate Mr Carlos Bautista Ojeda, the rapporteur, on his excellent work. The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should also be thanked for its almost unanimous support for this sector. The rapporteur has already described the importance of the fruit and vegetable sector for the countries of southern Europe, so there is no need for me to do so.
Almost two years ago, the Council requested the Commission to undertake a specific assessment of the situation of the nuts sector in the framework of the report on the operation of the COM in fruit and vegetables. This problem has yet to be finally resolved. We are still trying to provide a remedy in extending the improvement plans. What is actually required is a final and immediately applicable definition, along with the implementation of support mechanisms to replace the present improvement programmes as they expire.
The Commission is adamant on resolving the extensions through this draft Regulation. A reduction in Community cofinancing is involved, however. In addition, aid to hazelnuts is proposed, but only for farmers not eligible for the extension.
The European Commission's proposal to extend the improvement plans for a second year is positive. Nonetheless, it does not allay all of the producers' concerns. As I stated, the latter are calling for a permanent solution, so they can continue to resist the strong competition by almonds from the United States and hazelnuts from Turkey.
The report adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development deals with the gaps in the Commission's plan. The amendments adopted call for specific aid to hazelnuts for all organisations requesting it, not just for those participating in improvement plans, as the Commission suggests. The amendments also call for the retention of current cofinancing levels for these improvement plans, whereas the Commission wishes to increase the Member States' cofinancing from 18 to 25%. The deletion of a reference to gradual transferral of financial responsibility to the producers in recital 2 is also requested. Finally, there is the call to introduce a permanent regime based on the award of aid per hectare, subject to the implementation of good agricultural and environmentally friendly practice.
Commissioner, these are the main requests from the Committee on Agriculture. The Committee also calls for this aid to be extended to chestnuts, a product not currently covered by the improvement plans.
The key factor is that the European Parliament is in favour of a permanent solution for this sector in the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables. Parliament calls on the Commission to put forward a proposal for the implementation of a definitive support regime for the sector before 1 June 2002.
Efforts to find a solution to the situation of the nuts sector in the European Union within the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables must therefore be intensified.
Madam President, I must first congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report.
You will be aware, Commissioner, that on numerous occasions the European Parliament has expressed its institutional support for the nuts sector in the European Union. It has done so conscious of the fact that they are essentially a multifunctional crop which contributes to environmental conservation and helps combat erosion. It also has a part to play in regional planning, as it is one of the few activities keeping people on the land in places where other forms of agriculture are not viable. As most of the producer regions in the European Union are disadvantaged, it has economic and social significance too.
We are not in a position to oppose the Commission's proposal to extend these plans for improving aid to the sector. We certainly support the rapporteur's view that it is not acceptable for the Commission to propose excluding producer organisations wishing to benefit from the improvement plans from eligibility for the specific hazelnut aid. We cannot either go along with the Commission's intention of reducing Community cofinancing from 82 to 75% in these extended plans.
Commissioner, we are bound to say that we would like our request for permanent support to this sector to go on record. Such a solution would provide stability and make it possible to produce the crop in Europe. This can only happen if we succeed in setting up permanent support targeted at producer organisations and within a stable framework, namely the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 14 March 2002.
Colleagues, at the very moment when the European Union at the European Council in Barcelona has taken significant steps forward on economic reform and modernisation, yesterday evening in Bologna terrorists assassinated Professor Marco Biagi, a Professor of Labour Law in the University of Modena and an adviser to the Italian government on labour and employment policy. Professor Biagi is survived by his wife and two children.
Terrorist acts are always vile and in this instance the attack also was clearly targeted. In assassinating Marco Biagi, the terrorists had in their sights a man who was highly regarded both professionally and personally, and a creator of the indispensable policy of labour market reform to promote employment in Italy and in Europe. He was also a strong advocate of social dialogue and solidarity, as well as progress and modernisation in his own country and was strongly committed to the European ideal.
For all these reasons, this murder not only has an impact on Italy, but strikes at the very heart of our common European ideal.
I send my deepest condolences and sympathy to Mr Biagi's family, to his university colleagues, and on behalf of our Italian colleagues and all of this House, I convey to the Italian authorities our deep sense of shock and outrage.
Colleagues, it is our pleasure to have with us today in the Diplomatic Gallery, a delegation from the Croatian Parliament, the Hrvatski Sabor, led by Mr Ivo Skrabalo, Chairman of the Sub-Committee for relations with the European Parliament and Chairman of the Committee of Interparliamentary Cooperation of the Croatian Parliament.
Colleagues will recall that only a few months ago, on 12 December 2001, the European Parliament gave its assent to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, which is an excellent basis for our future cooperation.
Later today our distinguished guests will be meeting the European Parliament Delegation for relations with the countries of South East Europe, chaired by Mrs Doris Pack, for the 10th European Parliament/Croatia Interparliamentary meeting.
We all particularly appreciate your presence with us, Mr Skrabalo, at this important time for the development of stability and peace in South East Europe, and we thank you for joining us in Parliament this afternoon.
Before we begin the debate, I should like to communicate a number of important items in respect of our timetable and procedure. The President of the European Council, Mr Jos Mara Aznar, must leave at 16.30 in order to attend the international conference on financing for development in Monterrey, Mexico. He will thus lead the debate, respond to its first round, and will then be replaced.
The President of the European Commission, Mr Romano Prodi, who will attend the same conference in Mexico, in the dramatic circumstances of the assassination of Professor Biagi, who was a close personal friend of Mr Prodi, feels obliged to travel this afternoon to Bologna in order to pay his respects. I know the House will understand his personal conviction in this matter. He will therefore also attend the first part of the debate on the Barcelona European Council and will then be replaced by Mrs de Palacio, Vice-President of the Commission.
Before introducing the debate, I would like to say that last week in Barcelona, for the first occasion during my Presidency of this House, I had the honour to address a European Summit meeting on your behalf. My emphasis was on our contribution, on the work which so many rapporteurs, committee chairs and political group coordinators had led and participated in. I want to thank everyone in this House who made such a special effort to deliver in substance and to deliver on time. It was wonderful position as President of the European Parliament to be able to have made such a major contribution to the Barcelona Summit meeting.
In the course of that meeting, I stressed our Parliament's desire to develop a new, more mature partnership and dialogue with the European Council on a wide range of issues. I hope and believe that we have begun the process which will make this possible in the near future.
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the outcome of the European Council meeting held in Barcelona on 15 and 16 March 2002.
I am very pleased today to welcome to our debate the President-in-Office of the Council, Spanish Prime Minister Jos Mara Aznar, and also the President of the European Commission, Mr Romano Prodi.
Since late last year when the Commission wrote a note to my predecessor saying that there was a delivery gap, we have done our part, in our way, to close that gap. Lisbon, and then the Barcelona review and outlook, have fixed new deadlines for delivery. This Parliament has delivered for Barcelona and will continue to do so in active partnership in terms of our legal responsibilities.
I have suggested to the Presidency that in the matter of simplifying and improving the regulatory environment - in other words, identifying how to achieve better law-making and governance in the EU - that all of our institutions: Parliament, Council and Commission, could benefit from a new and more mature prospect for dialogue. I have commended this view to the President-in-Office. I am pleased to report that there is a recognition at the political level that this is a desirable development. I hope, between now and Seville, through the good offices of Mr Aznar and his colleagues in the Presidency, and through those of Mr Prodi and his colleagues in the Commission, to bring this objective to fruition.
Against that background, it is my great pleasure to invite the President-in-Office to introduce our debate on the Barcelona Summit.
Mr President of the European Parliament, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the European Council I wish to add my voice to that of the President of the European Parliament, Pat Cox, to condemn with the utmost energy the murder, which took place yesterday in Bologna, of Professor Marco Biagi, advisor to the Italian Labour Minister, Mr Maroni. On behalf of the European Council, I extend our condolences to the family of Mr Biagi, which we also extend to the Italian authorities and the Italian people.
The fight against terrorism is a fundamental priority in the European Union. Terrorism, as we all know, is a threat to liberty and democracy, and must be fought firmly and steadfastly, with all the means available to us under the Rule of Law. We must, therefore, reaffirm our most decisive determination and confront terrorism serenely and with political courage, out of solidarity with the victims, and in order to uphold our democratic dignity.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to appear before this House, as I had the opportunity to announce in January, when I presented the priorities of the Spanish Presidency of the European Union, to inform you today about the results of the Barcelona European Council.
Two years ago, at the Lisbon European Council, the Heads of State and Government wondered how Europe could deal with the enormous changes that our societies are currently facing as a result of globalisation and how we could respond to the challenges of a knowledge-based economy.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 14 March 2002.
May I inform the House that I have taken the chair because Mr Cox is on his way back to Strasbourg from Great Britain, having travelled there earlier today to pay his respects to the royal family on the occasion of the death of the Queen Mother.
We shall be observing a minute's silence in memory of the Queen Mother tomorrow.
Ladies and gentlemen, a tragic incident took place in the town of Nanterre in France on the night of Tuesday 26 March. An armed man gunned down members of the municipal council during a council meeting, leaving eight councillors dead and fourteen very seriously wounded.
May I express my deepest condolences and sympathy on behalf of the European Parliament to the town of Nanterre, to the municipal council and to the victims' families. I should also like to praise the courage of the members of the council who managed to overpower the intruder.
Elsewhere, Jun Priede Prez, the only Socialist councillor in the village of Orio in the Basque country, was murdered by two terrorists on 21 March. The House sent its condolences and sympathy to Mr Priede's family and to the Chairman of the Spanish Socialist party the very same day. We also sent a message of support to the Spanish authorities. In murdering Jun Priede Prez, the terrorists demonstrated yet again that they deny not only the right to life but, in this case, the right to life of a man who had dedicated himself to the welfare of his fellow citizens. They even deny the right to attend local political events and the right to exercise democratic rights.
Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to join me in a minute's silence for these two incidents.
Mr President, I know that a resolution is going to be adopted on the problem of Israel and Palestine during this sitting, but I believe we cannot start it without remembering that there have been 200 murders in Palestinian territory and that the Palestinian people are being humiliated by the army of a State.
I therefore believe that we need this sitting to begin also...
Mr Nogueira Romn, may I ask you to repeat your comment when we get to the debate on the Middle East.
Mr President, on a point of order, I should like, through you, to thank President Cox for his visit to the UK today. In that context, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, may I say that a number of my British colleagues wish to participate at least in some way in the occasion of the state funeral of the Queen Mother tomorrow. That is to take place at 12.30 p.m. I have raised the matter in my group, which supports my request, that the vote tomorrow might be brought forward to 11.30 a.m. so that all British Members who wish to can at least watch the state funeral at 12.30 p.m.
Mr President, I would like to thank you for the comments you made earlier and to say briefly to the House and to the citizens who are listening, that when terrorists become madmen and when madmen become terrorists and kill Members of Parliament, at a time when civilians are the target of increasingly ruthless attacks which seek to eliminate politicians and MPs, it is worthwhile recalling that these people, these MPs, are showing utmost courage to protect the public good.
Mr President, I would like, respectfully, to point out that, very often, when we rise and observe a minute's silence, the people in the public gallery remain comfortably in their seats. Considering that those people are European citizens too, I feel that they should also rise and observe a minute's silence with us.
Mr President, on a point of order, in connection with the point raised by Mr Evans, I too would like to thank President Cox for his visit to London today to pay his respects on behalf of the European Parliament on the occasion of the death of the Queen Mother. I hope that the Conference of Presidents can give positive consideration to the request made by Mr Evans that the votes be brought forward tomorrow morning, so as to enable those British Members, and other Members, who may want to watch the funeral on television to do so.
The draft agenda, as finalised by the Conference of Presidents of the political groups at its meeting on 4 April, has been distributed in accordance with Rule 110.
The Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for the vote on the joint debate of the six discharge reports of the Committee on Budgetary Control to be held at noon on Wednesday.
Mr President, the Minutes are correct but I should like to make a comment. Yesterday I was present in Strasbourg, and from the moment I arrived I had meetings through till after 9 p.m. I did not, therefore, sign the register in the plenary chamber, so when we look at the Minutes my name is not there.
Some organisations publish details of Members' attendances; however this is a classic example of how sometimes when they say that Members have not attended the plenary part-sessions it is simply that they have not signed in in the Chamber on that day. I should like this put on record. Members should bear this in mind when those records are published and it appears that the record of attendance does not correspond to the reality of the situation.
Thank you, Mr Wynn. Your comment will, of course, be included in the Minutes.
Madam President, on a point of order, I should like to ask you to ask the President of Parliament to register our complaint to the French Government, to the Mayor of Strasbourg and indeed to Air France: some of us were unable to get to the start of the plenary session yesterday because Air France cancelled one of the only direct flights from the UK to Strasbourg. That meant a lot of us had to fly via Nantes and did not arrive until 9 p.m. We were the lucky ones. I understand the President of Parliament was also affected. If the French Government insists that we meet here for 12 sessions a year - and I have not been one of those complaining about it - please let us get to the plenary session and indeed get home from the plenary session after the votes at 6.30 on Thursday evening!
It is absolutely ridiculous that Members of the European Parliament cannot take part in debates. I was due to speak in one of those debates yesterday, as I know other people were. Would the President please contact the officials and ask them to do something about it?
Mrs Lynn, I will, of course, pass on your complaint. President Cox was also affected by this incident, as you know. We shall notify the French Government. Having said that, it appears that, rather than a single party being responsible for this problem, which we all condemn, several parties are to blame. We shall therefore pass on your complaint to all those responsible for this incident to prevent it from happening again.
Madam President, we can agree to this request for urgent procedure if this is dealt with at the second April part-session, when we will also know how the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market interprets the law. Although we do not agree with changing the legal basis, we are prepared, subject to these conditions, to discuss this at the second April part-session.
Madam President, this proposal for a Regulation implements Resolution 1390, adopted on 16 January of this year by the United Nations Security Council, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. With regard to the 30 days required for signatory States to adopt the measures that correspond to the implementation of the aforementioned United Nations Resolution, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs yesterday voted in favour of the urgency procedure and for there to be a procedure without report, that is to say, that it should pass directly to plenary with time for amendments to be tabled by the political groups. I would ask the Presidency to set a long deadline for the tabling of amendments to take account of these circumstances.
I would like to make two further observations. The first is that, in order to implement Resolutions such as Resolution 1390, the European Union should take two different types of action: one which corresponds to the second pillar, common foreign and security policy, and another within the framework of the EC Treaty. Yesterday, the Commission almost unanimously came to the conclusion that Parliament should work on the development of instruments in the second pillar, in other words, the development of the common position that is being adopted at this time. And, if Parliament is not involved, it should at very least be kept informed, for what is laid down in the Treaty is one issue, and common sense and the idea that this House is the true representative of citizens' interests is quite another.
My second observation is that the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights has expressed a great deal of concern in this regard and will formally request that the Council and those Member States that form part of the United Nations Security Council make use of those procedural mechanisms needed to correct possible non-justified inclusions of names of natural or legal persons in these lists. This is currently the cause of much public concern in EU Member States.
Finally, we would ask the Commission not to force us to take this kind of action. Parliament cannot seriously be expected to support this decision with only five days notice, for it is not really a question of issuing an opinion, but of supporting this United Nations Resolution, when the Resolution was passed on 19 January. We would ask that in future we be more rapidly involved in the process of drawing up this type of Regulation in order that this Parliament can provide its support with full knowledge of the facts and not, as in this case, in a truly unbalanced effort.
Mrs Frahm, you asked to take the floor. Are you speaking for or against the request for urgent procedure?
Madam Palacio, I do not understand why you have let the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs accept this procedure. I do not understand why the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs is to deal with a list of names without knowing how this list has been drawn up and without knowing how it can be altered. If the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs had taken its tasks seriously, it would have refused to deal with such a matter until it knew how the list of names could be altered. To win the respect of the Commission, it is not enough simply to agree to work at the Commission's pace. This is something that should have been rejected.
Is there a Member to speak in favour of the request for urgent procedure?
Madam President, in support of the urgent procedure, and to specifically respond to this point, I would like to repeat that this is not a case of Parliament giving its opinion on a list. The matter in hand here is whether Parliament should support a decision made by the United Nations Security Council. This is an act adopted by the United Nations Security Council that the signatory States and the European Union - as representative regional power in some cases of signatory States - should support, but in which it cannot participate.
Chapter VII(40 and41) of the United Nations Charter makes reference to the fact that the Security Council can implement any measures it deems necessary and that the signatory States must - for this is a mandatory act - apply them. Therefore, any amendment of these lists falls to the Security Council. What the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is asking - and we will implement it - is that the Council, as representative of the European Union, and the Member States that form part of the Security Council, keep an eye on the arbitration of procedures and mechanisms within the United Nations Security Council with the aim that, if there is any natural or legal person included in this list that should not be there, an exception can be made.
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Chechnya.
Mr de Miguel, the Minister speaking on behalf of the Council, has the floor.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, since the Russian military operations in the Russian Federal Republic of Chechnya resumed in September 1999, the situation there has been treated as a priority by the European Union. Both the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council, back in December 1999, and the actions of the presidencies which have followed it, are testimony to this. Contrary to what some people predicted, this position has not altered following the attacks of 11 September.
The Spanish Presidency has been acting and will continue to act throughout this six-month period in a way that is fully coherent with this issue of concern to the Union. The Presidency's work plan for the development of a common strategy for Russia included a paragraph which indicated our will to 'continue to express the Union's desire for an early peaceful solution in Chechnya within the framework of the principle territorial integrity, the Rule of Law and respect for human rights, to promote an improvement of the conditions for the safer and more effective distribution of humanitarian aid?.
In the months since January, these intentions have been turned into various concrete actions. The Presidency has included the Chechen issue on the agenda of all political talks between the European Union and Russia at various levels, with both political representatives, such as the European Union-Russia Ministerial troika, the European Union-Russia political directors' troika and the PSC-Russia troika, and in meetings of experts, the so-called COEST troika.
On the occasion of the recent ministerial-level troika with the Russian Foreign Minister, Mr Ivanov, on 2 April, the issue was once again raised by the Presidency. Furthermore, at the beginning of March, the troika of Union Heads of Mission in Moscow made a representation to the Russian Federation's Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr Gusarov, to express the Union's concern at the human rights situation in the region.
We must add to all these actions, which have served to communicate the Union's position on the development of the Caucasus Republic to the Russian authorities, the request for, and subsequent support from Russia for, the trip which the troika of Heads of Mission intends to make to the region during April, which will allow us to obtain information on the development of events. For this same purpose of compiling information, the troika of Heads of Mission maintains frequent contacts with representatives of NGOs and competent authorities such as Mr Kalamanov, the Kremlin's special representative for human rights in Chechnya, or Mr Yastrzhembsky, the presidential spokesman.
While explaining these specific measures, which are not restricted in this case to those being developed by the Spanish Presidency in particular, I must point out that the Union's concern has been translated into a significant financial commitment. The European Union is currently the greatest donor of humanitarian aid to the region. The sums allocated to it amount to EUR 65 million for the period between the resumption of military operations in 1999 and the current time. Of these sums, EUR 40 million has been earmarked for 2001.
With regard to the current situation in Chechnya, I would like to stress certain aspects. In the field of human rights, all the reports from the OSCE support group, from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and from the various NGOs continue to give cause for concern. Lord Judd stated in the report communicated to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, that the progress observed in this field over the last year had been scant. The report of the support group of the OSCE for the early months of this year with regard to military operations carried out during this period spoke of civilian disappearances, lootings, the indiscriminate use of force and other violations of the human rights of civilians, all of this in contravention of what had been previously agreed. The representative of the public prosecutor's office was not present during all operations.
We must acknowledge the steps taken by the Russian authorities to improve the situation. President Putin - we must recognise - has expressed his commitment that the people guilty of human rights violations, including the military, will be tried and punished. These statements have also been repeated by other official representatives.
The Office of the Kremlin's Special Representative for Human Rights in Chechnya has carried out its work, condemning alleged violations of human rights. The Russian authorities are cooperating with the organisations active in this area. With regard to the intergovernmental organisations, in addition to cooperation with the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights, the mandate of the OSCE support group in Chechnya has been renewed until 31 December 2002; three representatives of the Council of Europe are continuing to participate in the same office and the work of the mixed working group consisting of members of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and the Duma are continuing their work.
With regard to the NGOs, last January the creation of the Council for the protection of human rights in Chechnya was agreed, which would be made up of representatives of these non-governmental organisations, the public prosecutor's office, the security forces and local authorities, and which would meet on a monthly basis. Furthermore, within this repertoire of positive measures, the Chechen police are present at control posts on the Republic's transport routes. However, in view of the analysis of the current situation, these measures are insufficient.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, there is still the ongoing tragedy of the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, who are mainly dissuaded from returning to Chechnya by the continuing situation of insecurity and there are also certain difficulties to be faced by the humanitarian organisations in carrying out their work. We also have to recognise that the Russian authorities have adopted different measures in the region: as well as the creation of the aforementioned working groups with the NGOs, which will provide a forum in which to deal with these issues, the Russian authorities have applied various measures to normalise life. These measures are not restricted to socio-economic development plans, the reopening of educational establishments or the reestablishment of the public pensions system, but they also extend to the drawing up of a draft constitution which will have to be put to a referendum. This will lead to the holding of new elections in which the population of the region will be able to elect their representatives.
In view of the persistence of the problems I have just described, the European Union has exploited - and will continue to exploit - all channels of dialogue in order to communicate its position to the Russian authorities, and that position is based on the following points: firstly, the European Union recognises the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation as well as its right and responsibility to protect its population from terrorist attacks, which the Union condemns unreservedly. This recognition is accompanied by a double consideration: firstly, the Union expresses its firm conviction that that responsibility to protect the population must be fulfilled within the framework of the Rule of Law and strict compliance with respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, which are enshrined in numerous treaties to which the Russian Federation is party.
The European Union requests that the Russian authorities try and punish the people responsible for human rights violations, thereby eliminating any risk of impunity, which unfortunately some people have enjoyed in the past. Those authorities are furthermore urged to provide federal officials with appropriate training in the field of human rights, which would prevent these events from reoccurring in the future.
I would like to acknowledge the contribution made in this area by the Council of Europe and the Office of the United Nations' High Commission for Human Rights, and take this opportunity to express the European Union's support for the work of these organisations and the OSCE in Chechnya.
The Union also wants the Russian authorities to continue to cooperate with the international bodies and NGOs in order to eliminate the obstacles that are still hindering their work. Specifically, these organisations must be allowed access to detention centres and they must be provided with the means for radio communication. An improvement in the human rights situation will undoubtedly encourage the return of displaced persons. The removal of the restrictions which currently make access to the area for the media difficult will also contribute to increasing trust, both within the civil population and within the international community.
The second major point of the Union's position is that terrorist acts carried out by Chechen armed factions are without doubt part of the problem but they are by no means the whole problem. A lasting solution to this problem therefore depends on the normalisation of civilian life by means of the restoration of democratic mechanisms and structures in the Chechen Republic. That result must be achieved through dialogue with the various sectors of Chechen society. In this regard, the European Union is urging the Russian authorities to renew the contacts initiated last November.
Thirdly, the European Union believes that its position on this issue is level-headed, since, on the one hand, it has no hesitation in acknowledging the progress made and, on the other, it must continue to indicate those areas in which there are still serious shortcomings. The Union is thereby acting fully in accordance with the values that underpin both its very existence and its relations with third countries, including the strategic relationship between the European Union and Russia.
The core of these values shared by the Union and Russia is the respect for the Rule of Law and the safeguard of human rights and fundamental freedoms. This attitude of equanimity and coherence will also guide the European Union's actions with regard to the treatment of Chechnya at the 58th sitting of the Humans Rights Commission.
The Union has informed the Russian authorities of its full willingness to negotiate a Presidency declaration that incorporates both progress and shortcomings in similar terms to those which I have expressed in this House. Also, we have told those authorities that if this willingness on the part of the Union is not reflected by Russia, the European Union will not hesitate in adopting a resolution, as was necessary during the 2001 session.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it only remains for me to insist on the firmness and coherence of the Union's position, which will continue to treat the Chechen situation as a priority in terms of its relations with Russia, and it will continue to direct all its attention and efforts towards it as events require, and I would also like to say that this issue will form a significant part of the dialogue that will take place on 28 May at the summit between Russia and the European Union.
Mr President, the Commission shares Parliament's concern about the deterioration of the situation on the ground in Chechnya, as shown by a number of recent solid reports of serious violations of human rights over the past few months.
In view of these reports, including from the Council of Europe, the European Union has continued to express its concerns on the matter to the Russian authorities through the appropriate diplomatic channels. As you are aware, the EU-Russia political dialogue offers an intensive calendar of high-level meetings, including last week's Ministerial Troika with Foreign Minister Ivanov in Madrid.
The position of the European Union on this issue is quite simple, and quite firm. The EU supports Russia wholeheartedly in its legitimate fight against terrorism, in Chechnya and elsewhere. There should be no doubt about this. Our calls for a political solution which, without prejudice to the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, satisfies the majority of the Chechen people, do not in any way undermine such support.
Equally, there should be no doubt about the EU commitment to uphold human rights in the fight against terrorism world-wide, including in Chechnya. In this regard, I am confident that the European Parliament fully shares the view that the fight against international terrorism cannot serve as justification or excuse for the violation of the most basic individual human rights, be it in the West Bank, in Afghanistan or in Chechnya. This should not change - and has indeed not changed - due to the horrible terrorist attacks of 11 September last year.
Against the background of our joint efforts with Russia to establish closer political and economic relations, the European Union has repeatedly made clear to Russia that it expects her to act in full accordance with the values that Russia undertook to respect when it entered the Council of Europe and the OSCE. These basic principles of full respect of fundamental human rights and the rule of law, including international law, constitute an integral part of the strategic partnership that we are trying to build together.
The next item is the report (A5-0037/2002) by Mr Beazley, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the evaluation report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the application of the Council Recommendation of 24 September 1998 concerning the protection of minors and human dignity [COM(2001) 106 - C5-0191/2001 - 2001/2087(COS)].
Mr President, may I first pay credit to my colleague, Mr Heaton-Harris, for the initial work he did in drafting this report before he moved to another committee.
The rapid development of the audio-visual media has brought many real benefits in terms of education, spreading greater awareness of public affairs around the world, and not least in the field of entertainment.
However, along with the undoubted advantages, there have also been concerns that, given the generally greater adeptness of children at using audio-visual resources, in some areas there are dangers of their obtaining access to unsuitable or harmful material. This is most obvious in the fields of overt sexual material and gratuitous violence.
The principles which have guided this report are to encourage greater public awareness of these issues and to support parental responsibility and to develop co-operation between the content providers, consumer organisations and the respective authorities, both national and European. Self-regulation is considered to be the main instrument, underpinned by legal requirements where necessary.
The report, which analyses the Commission's evaluation report, is primarily concerned with the Internet and with video games, as it was felt important not to anticipate a possible future review of the Television without Frontiers directive. The report calls for user-friendly content filter systems to enable parents to predetermine the sort of content which they feel is unsuitable viewing for their children and, in this regard I very much welcome the fact that, since the report was first drafted, the Internet Content Rating Association (ICRA), has launched a filter system available free of charge, an initiative supported by the Commission.
We also called for greater public awareness, for education campaigns and hotlines to be set up, as already exists in TV broadcasting, so that complaints about illegal or harmful content may be recorded by consumers, particularly by parents.
We consider that so-called 'Internet Chat Rooms' should be subject to greater monitoring, both of the rules for their installation and in relation to their use. As far as video games are concerned, we call upon the Member States to continue to promote the rating of video games, again through self-regulation, but if that is considered to be inadequate in some cases, it should be backed up by the introduction of agreed minimum standards of content and promotion. It is also hoped that the Member States will continue to exchange best practice in this field and co-ordinate measures which are taken in co-operation with the industry and with content providers.
The report does not seek to sensationalise or exaggerate perceived dangers, but it does provide a useful framework to encourage public awareness of the risks involved and to provide practical remedies. Finally, Parliament calls on the Commission to draw up a further report, preferably before the end of this year, on the implementation of the recommendation with specific reference to implementation in each Member State. I commend the report to the House.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the protection of minors and human dignity is an issue that is close to the hearts of us all. It is therefore to be welcomed that the Commission has presented this evaluation report on the progress we are making in this area in relation to audio-visual media and the Internet. Mr Beazley, as Mr Heaton-Harris before him, has drafted a sterling report on the subject.
Nevertheless, I should like to take this opportunity of drawing your attention once again to the fact that technical resources and legislation from above are not sufficient to guarantee this protection. There are always ways and means, devious or otherwise, to get round this, and certainly children are very resourceful in this area. Self-regulation, as is now being applied on a large scale, appears to be a very handy instrument. However, I want to point out again at this juncture that instilling awareness in minors themselves, as well as their parents and educators, is still the best way forward. This is possible by, on the one hand, paying ample attention to media education at school, so that minors can be taught to identify harmful content for themselves, and, on the other hand, by providing educators with a tool, such as the Dutch 'viewer guide' classification system. This is a system on which we had a very interesting hearing yesterday and in which I am also personally involved in the Netherlands. It is a well thought-out system which actually works, and by means of which children can handle audio-visual media products with awareness. The system is also accompanied by an age category. MG6 means: six years, parental guidance desirable, and, in this way, adults are reminded once again of their responsibilities, for uninterested parents produce vulnerable children. I would therefore call on the Member States and the Commission, when studying best practices, to keep this classification system in mind and, when planning school curricula, to make room for media education too.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I would like first to congratulate Mr Beazley on his report and thank him for his good cooperation. This topic is, as my predecessor on the floor has confirmed, close to all our hearts. There are many points on which we agree, such as trust being a better fundamental premise for this common endeavour than overall control or even censorship, neither of which would serve as a good basis for cooperation.
We also agree that we must advertise the hotlines more extensively in order for them to be used, as we desire, right across the whole of Europe, and in order for us to be able to establish where protection is needed. We agree, too, that we have to provide parents with the right tools to enable them, together with their children, to assess which TV programmes, computer games, and films are the right ones for their children, and in order to support them in their judgment of the programmes. On this I agree with Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, who spoke before me. This is where moving closer on a European level to a uniform system of classification for the whole audio-visual sector seems to be of the greatest and most urgent importance, as that would be a tool facilitating control by parents and young people themselves, one that could also function on the basis of trust and not tend towards either excessive control or censorship.
I now come to what I believe is at the moment the most important point in connection with this 'box', namely that the Internet strikes many as a sort of 'wonderbox'; they stand in front of it and are simply overwhelmed by all the stuff that comes out of it, forgetting in the process what influences can come into play, especially on children and young people, if we do not consciously discern what is heading in our direction. Let me emphasise it three times, four times, ten times over: media literacy. Media literacy - we cannot start too soon on heightening awareness of it and on playing our part in developing it. To do this, we also need not only the political willingness; we also need more programmes. For them, we need money. Perhaps we will achieve some sort of collaboration with all the players at the European level, something which is, at the end of the day, in the interests of all.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, our experience following the quantum leap in the mass media, especially television, is increasing daily. I am sure you have all witnessed in your countries, as I have witnessed in mine, the boom in cheap 'big brother' type television programmes in which people agree to be imprisoned, for want of a better word, while viewers are invited to peep through the keyhole, waiting for something titillating to happen, usually - to be frank - a sex scene, or for something unexpected or interesting to happen. But, at the same time, this sort of programme encourages viewers - especially young viewers - to look on the people playing this sort of lottery, betting body and soul in the hope of winning money at the expense of the others, as role models.
These programmes are objectionable and absurd but we cannot attack them through legislation or administrative intervention. As other speakers have said, technical rules do no good, nor does informing and educating children, because forbidden fruit does, of course, taste sweeter. None of this is enough especially, Commissioner, as everyone will be able to access this sort of programme on the Internet sooner or later. I think we need some sort of European legislation and regulations with more teeth than we have at present. I do not have a great deal of faith in self-regulation because competition lives by its own - very powerful - rules. However, it would be no bad thing if we could come up with some sort of more binding code of conduct than we have at present. If we were to give parents and consumers the right to lay siege to the producers of these cheap programmes, it would, perhaps, provide some small counterweight to competition. And, of course, we could look at the more technical question of watersheds to draw a dividing line between when children watch television and their bedtime and when these programmes go out.
However, even with all this, unless we come up with something more original and imaginative, I shall persist in my pessimism as to the future and the success of this sort of programme.
Mr President, the Internet and television have changed the world. Knowledge and information at your fingertips, 24 hours a day and in large quantities. As I have indicated in previous speeches, however, the Internet and television are a reflection of society. The Commission evaluation report and the report by the rapporteur, Mr Beazley, confirm this. Both media are also used for criminal and degrading purposes. I am pleased with the Commission evaluation report and the rapporteur's report. It is encouraging that the Commission is able to conclude that, in many Member States, a great deal is being done to prevent the distribution of child pornography. This also applies to other degrading and illegal activities. Attention is rightly drawn to the need for the Commission to continue to urge the Member States to implement the provisions in the recommendation.
The rapporteur is also right to draw attention to parental responsibility in the first place, but also to the responsibility of the government and of suppliers of Internet products. They must jointly ensure that human beings are valued as unique creatures and not as instruments to fulfil personal needs. Children, in particular, deserve protection in this area, so that they can develop a healthy image of human beings. This is not just about child pornography. This is also about racism, hatred and other forms of degrading excrescences which can so easily be spread via the Internet and television.
The global reach of the Internet and television requires an international approach. The wish expressed by Member States to subject national legislative frameworks to minimum standards at European, and probably global, level receives my approval. In my view, the combination of national frameworks and international minimum standards makes sense. This does justice to the global problem and cultural diversity. Moreover, the maintenance of a national legislative framework does not give the Member States the opportunity of hiding behind international legislation.
The proposal to consult all parties involved when drafting codes of conduct and other ways of preventing the distribution of pornography and racist material is useful. I should, however, like to add that, in matters of censorship and handling illegal material, the police and justice departments are the legally competent authorities.
Finally, I should like to urge the European Commission to encourage the Member States to continue to pay attention to evils which are distributed via television, video games and films. From the report, it is clear that less progress has been made in these areas than in the area of the Internet. Less clear-cut evils are still evils. And where the protection of minors and human dignity are concerned, we cannot be alert enough.
. (FR) Mr President, the representatives of the MPF in this House welcome the European Parliament resolution on the evaluation report by the Commission concerning the protection of minors and human dignity, which they will be voting for.
On this subject, which concerns the very essence of humanity, there are two main players involved: the family, first of all, which bears full responsibility for the upbringing of its children, and secondly, society, which must ensure that children are protected. It is, therefore, important - as emphasised in the resolution that we are discussing today - to do all we can to ensure that protective frameworks are established, in particular for the forms of media which are used freely by young consumers, be they audiovisual, written resources or on the Internet.
It is also important for the victims of abuses of power to be able to turn to a moral authority that can help them. We must increase the means available to these organisations.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 11 April 2002
Mr President, with regard to my report which has just been mentioned, I would ask, since it has been adopted unanimously, both by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and since it deals purely with a change of legal base which Parliament - in the form of a unanimouse decision by the two committees - has not agreed to, I would ask that it be voted on tomorrow without the need for a debate this evening, a debate in which I will probably be the only speaker.
I would therefore ask that it be removed from the agenda and that we proceed directly to the vote tomorrow in order to save time, both for the President and for all the other Members.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the meeting of Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers in Valencia of 22/23 April 2002 and the situation in the Middle East.
Thank you very much, Mr President. It is a great pleasure for me to appear in this House to inform you of two issues which are related for obvious reasons.
On the one hand, the Fifth Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference which took place in Valencia yesterday and the day before yesterday, and on the other, the current situation in the Middle East, the latest events and the efforts being made to put the peace process back on track.
If you will allow me, I will begin by describing the contribution I believe this ministerial meeting has made and then end with some comments on the situation in the Middle East.
I would firstly like to say that we all had doubts about whether or not this Euro-Mediterranean ministerial meeting would be able to take place, for obvious reasons: the situation in the Middle East presented enormous uncertainties and serious risks and, at certain moments, many people doubted whether this meeting could even take place. I therefore believe that the fact that we have been able to hold it is a success in itself.
As well as holding the meeting, the fact that we have been able to achieve conclusions which enjoyed the consensus of all the parties present was also a success. You know that the delegations from Syria and Lebanon finally decided not to attend in order not to come into contact with the Israeli delegation, but the other countries of the Mediterranean did attend and the twenty-five of us reached a consensus on approving an action plan, a programme in such sensitive areas as justice and internal affairs as well as a programme to guide dialogue between cultures and civilisations. I believe that this - which has been the subject of much work both prior to and during the conference - is also a notable success in itself.
I would also like to stress that practically all the Member States of the Barcelona Process attended at ministerial level and there was therefore an extremely high level of attendance and decision-making capacity, for which I am grateful to the countries of the South and the East of the Mediterranean as well as all my colleagues in the European Union.
As I have said, there has been solid previous work. If this had not been the case, given the enormous difficulties and tensions in the Middle East, we would not have been able to hold this conference and nor would it have borne fruit. I am referring to documents such as the establishment of priorities by the Presidency, the Commission's communication, the action lines, the guidelines of the recent General Affairs Council and all the documents and contributions of the countries of the South and the East of the Mediterranean.
I would, however, also like, in particular, to refer to the report by the European Parliament, which furthermore was produced by a Spanish Member, Mr Esteve. It is a wonderful report which I value very highly. We have accepted many of its proposals; we are going to try our best to incorporate more of them, since we believe they are all worthy of consideration. I would therefore like to say that everything we have achieved and approved in Valencia - I insist, by consensus - is not only the result of this desire for agreement, but also of everybody's contributions. It is the first time - I will talk about this later - that, following the Barcelona Declaration of 1995, documents of this nature have been approved by everybody, and not only as mere Presidency declarations of conclusions following a series of debates.
In this context, I would also like to stress - and I will return to this later - that we have approved the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly. I believe that this is a great step forward: it is an idea of the European Parliament which we have accepted and which we believe to be enormously important.
In any event, in the international situation resulting from 11 September and for a European Union on the point of the greatest enlargement in its history, which will practically double its current number of Members, I believe there is no doubt that the Mediterranean is becoming our strategic border, a region where we have to build an area of shared peace, stability, development and prosperity, an area in which the dialogue and cooperation between cultures and civilisations which the Barcelona Declaration calls for is possible.
Like all processes, the Barcelona Process is being built step by step. If we look back, we have travelled a long way since Barcelona, and proof of this lies in the fact that we have signed eleven of the twelve association agreements we intended to reach with the countries of the South. In Valencia we signed the agreement with Algeria. The agreement with Lebanon has been reached and it only remains for it to be signed. All the rest have been signed and many are in force.
Despite all of this, however, this progress, though important, is not sufficient. The Barcelona Process, the very approach and existence of which is of irreplaceable value, requires new political impetus, a kind of navigation chart which is able to take the Barcelona objectives from paper to reality. The Valencia action plan, the joint justice and internal affairs programme and the programme on dialogue between cultures and civilisations respond to this challenge, to this ambition to give the Barcelona Process new political impetus, which we all thought was languishing. I must insist that we have approved all of this by consensus at the Fifth Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference.
This means not only maintaining the process's potential for transformation, but also providing innovations both in terms of form and basis. I have already spoken of the form: it is the first political document adopted jointly by the partners in the process at a ministerial conference. This endows the action plan and the other documents I have mentioned with the status of Euro-Mediterranean contracts, of shared projects and commitments. I would like to reiterate this message: the Barcelona Process, the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue is not something that is addressed by the Fifteen to the Twelve, but rather it belongs to the Twenty-seven, and we want it to increasingly become something experienced and accepted by the Twenty-seven. The basis of the documents has also had the potential for transformation, because they conform to a series of principles which we believe must inspire the transformation of the process and propose a series of important initiatives which, as a whole, have the potential to produce a qualitative improvement in the construction of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.
What are these principles? I just referred to one of them: the principle of co-ownership. Also the principle of visibility: that the process is perceived as such by the governments but also by the respective civil societies. The principle of capillarity: that it be communicated to all the players present. And also other principles, such as that of structuring, that of credibility, that of efficiency or that of the realisation of the process. The realisation of the process requires initiatives. Obviously, to explain it completely would require a reading of the action plan, which is very exhaustive, but, while each and every one of these initiatives is very important, I would like to summarise by highlighting those which seem to me at the moment to be of the greatest political significance in the three chapters of the process: in the political and institutional chapter, in the economic and financial chapter and in the social, cultural and human chapter.
In the political and institutional chapter, I would like to highlight the greater democratisation of the process, by means of the proposal to create a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, which we must try to implement as soon as possible. Also by means of the implementation of new mechanisms for political dialogue and cooperation between the Twenty-seven, including issues such as security and defence policy, which I believe is very important, or terrorism - which I will refer to in a moment - or the promotion of human rights. Measures are also adopted for the creation of trust and partnership.
As I have said, terrorism is included for the first time on the Barcelona agenda, which I feel is absolutely essential at the moment for obvious reasons. And it is also envisaged that the plan will for the first time be subject - being a specific action plan approved by everybody - to monitoring and an assessment of compliance at the next Sixth Ministerial Conference in Barcelona, which I believe will make it more credible.
Turning to the economic and financial chapter, the Valencia action plan confirms the objective of creating a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area by 2010. To this end, we must conclude every one of the association agreements that I have already mentioned and also complete the South-South integration. It is extremely important that progress be made towards free trade areas in the South and we have therefore welcomed and given all our support - not only political but also technical, thanks to the Commission - to the Agadir Process initiated by Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt and Jordan. We all know that, in order for the Euro-Mediterranean process to be a success, it is necessary to guarantee the economic and, therefore, social and political development of the countries of the South. This requires, amongst other things, but very importantly all the same, the appropriate channelling of investment flows, and therefore the plan takes up one of the main priorities of the Presidency, that is, to promote the creation of a new financial instrument, which begins to function as a strengthened facility within the European Investment Bank, in order to support infrastructure works and in order to fundamentally support the private sector. Then we have laid down that, within one year, if possible, the decision will be taken to convert this improved facility into a Bank, a subsidiary of the European Investment Bank, with capital potentially open to other countries or even institutions and which, in any event, will allow greater financial resources to be directed towards the region.
The plan also takes up the conclusions and decisions adopted at the Euro-Mediterranean trade and industry ministerial meetings in Toledo and Malaga respectively. In the commercial field it includes a series of measures to facilitate investments and implement the liberalisation of services. In the industrial field it includes provisions to promote legislative harmonisation in order to facilitate the integration of our partners, promote innovation and access to new technologies and increase the role of the private sector in the construction of the Euro-Mediterranean association.
I would also like to make a particular reference in this chapter to the measures intended to stimulate investment in infrastructures and the interconnection of the transport, telecommunications and energy networks of our Mediterranean partners with the trans-European networks, and, in this regard, I would like to thank the Commission once again for the enormous and very positive work it has done. In this field I would also like to stress the European Union's will to facilitate the incorporation of the Mediterranean partners into the Galileo satellite navigation network.
Finally, with regard to the social, cultural and human chapter, the Presidency has tried to respond to the challenges posed by such important issues as immigration, dialogue between cultures and civilisations or the participation by the different players from civil society in Euro-Mediterranean construction, incorporating a series of measures into the action plan of which I would like to highlight the following: firstly, the adoption of a framework document, which I mentioned earlier, on justice and internal affairs, which deals, for example, with such important issues as the fight against drugs, the fight against organised crime, the fight against terrorism, treatment of migratory flows and the movement of persons, etc. This has also led us to adopt the decision in Valencia to convene a Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference on migration.
The decision has also been taken to create a foundation for dialogue between cultures and civilisations and to promote cultural, intellectual and social exchanges. It is a project shared by everybody and it must therefore be a response to the challenges in this field, a concrete response, also the adoption of an action plan, which can be channelled by means of the foundation or by some other method, so that the dialogue between cultures and civilisations focuses on three areas which we believe to be fundamental: youth, education and the media.
The next item is the report (A5-0092/2002) by Mr Kindermann on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the Annual Report from the Commission to the Council [COM(2001) 541 - C5-0007/2002 - 2002/2006 (COS)] and to the European Parliament on the results of the multi-annual guidance programmes for the fishing fleets at the end of 2000.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has again postponed the enactment of the proposals for the reform of the common fisheries policy, which was originally to take place last week. That has, at least, the advantage that they have another few weeks, or maybe even longer, to incorporate into their proposals for reform the suggestions for future fleet management in my report, on which we are voting today.
Now, then, to my report, in which I have consciously limited myself to the Commission's report on the implementation of the multi-annual guidance programmes for reducing fleets. As we are at the crucial stage of preparations for the reform of the common fisheries policy as a whole and thus also of the fleet policy in particular, I would like to express a view on the MAGPs in general, pointing out a number of problems to which consideration must be given at all costs when the reforms are set in train. There are only two - identically-worded - amendments to be voted on today, and I, as rapporteur, can support them without further ado. What this shows is that the Committee on Fisheries is as one in its assessment that the Commission's report for 2000, like its predecessors, had shown one thing above all, namely that the MAGPs have not achieved their objective of significantly reducing fleet capacity and thus the fishing effort.
We regret the fact that the majority of the Member States again failed to reach the target set by their MAGP. We call on these to make substantial efforts to reduce their fleets, at the same time welcoming the way that the Commission has commenced infringement proceedings against several Member States which have repeatedly not kept to their MAGP objectives. We also emphatically call on the Council and the Commission, both at the same time, to analyse the reasons why these targets were not met and develop more effective sanctions.
In addition, we call on the Commission, when formulating its proposals for a new fleet policy, to deal specifically with the need for a balance between the fishing capacities and/or fishing efforts of each Member State's fleet segment and the catch possibilities available to it. Last week, Commissioner Fischler told the Committee on Fisheries that the European Union's fishing vessels are about 40% over capacity, a figure that is not only alarming but also underlines all the more the urgent need for something to be done about this.
The primary cause of this over-capacity is that the instrument used to make cuts in the fleet did not achieve its objective and that there has even been a measurable increase in fleet capacity in recent years. There is therefore urgent need for this problem to be dealt with, but, in doing so, it is imperative that the Commission ensure that the fishing fleet is reduced in a socially acceptable manner, by setting up Community financial aid to cushion social hardship. One effective means would be premiums appealing to the fishermen, which the European Union and the Member States together could use to buy up fishing tonnage and either destroy it, sell it, or use it for purposes other than fishing.
The payment of such premiums should be mandatory, and, moreover, the possibility of an increase in the Community's financial contribution should be examined. The previous system led to the situation in which fishermen wanting to leave the business, or having already done so, sell their ship's tonnage on the market, so that even more of the fleet is bought up by efficient companies, yet this does not result in any reduction in capacity. At the end of the day, efforts to reduce fleet capacity must not be to the detriment of on-board working conditions, the vessel's safety, or the quality of the catch. Structural aid must therefore continue to be used to modernise the fleet, but means and ways have to be found to prevent the fishing effort being increased at the same time.
I am aware that the production of a balanced proposal is no easy task for the Commission, and we are already eagerly awaiting its proposals for reform. I will conclude by thanking all my fellow MEPs who have helped with this difficult task, and, in particular, the Commission for its constructive cooperation.
Mr Kindermann, I admire our Commissioner Fischler, who, as an Austrian, has to get to grips with the subject of one of the really big fleets.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Kindermann's report is a good one, and we are dealing with a complex and very important subject. Furthermore it is a politically very timely report within the context of the reform of the common fisheries policy which is taking place and at a time when there seemed to be proposals which questioned or removed this aid for the renewal or modernisation of the fleet.
I would therefore like to congratulate our rapporteur, Mr Kindermann, on this work and I would like to ask Commissioner Fischler, please, to take good note of what the European Parliament says today and I hope he will approve the Kindermann report. Mr Fischler, it is wise to put things right. Therefore, I ask you to take note of this, if Parliament takes this approach.
From Mr Kindermann's report, as approved in the Committee on Fisheries - improved, I believe, by the amendments we have presented - I would like to highlight the following: firstly, the fleet policy is crucial and has a great impact on fisheries, but also on the regions dependent on fishing and, ultimately, on the economic and social cohesion of Europe. This is a very important aspect which is highlighted in the report.
Fleet policy is an important political instrument, but it is not the only one. There are others to be considered, such as technical measures, the TACs, fishing bans, fishing days, etc. Increasing the capacity of the fleet does not mean fishing more, but fishing better, with more security, with greater habitability and with greater hygiene and health guarantees in terms of the treatment of fish on board. We therefore still need the FIFG aid for the renewal and modernisation of our fleet, which is a crucial aspect if we are still to have fishermen and a competitive fleet. We therefore ask the Commission to adopt measures to increase the capacity and tonnage of renewed vessels. We therefore also ask, within the framework of the reform of the fisheries policy, for the introduction of uniform criteria and objectives to measure the capacity and the segmentation of the fleets of the Member States, as well as the creation of a system for the inclusion and exclusion of vessels in the registers in order to guarantee that capacity does not increase.
In summary, we are dealing with a clear and concise report which I hope will reflect the approach of the Committee on Fisheries and this Parliament as a whole to the reform of the common fisheries policy which is getting closer, by opting - in accordance with our wishes - for the maintenance of a renewed, and therefore competitive, fisheries sector and not, Mr Fischler, for its dismantling.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report which we should see it firstly in the overall context of rebuilding fish stocks. The key points are firstly rebuilding fish stocks and secondly the need to devise ways of measuring fleets.
I welcome Mr Kindermann's work in this area. He has given us some very good pointers such as reminding us that we are not dealing with one single Community fleet, but with fishing fleets of individual Member States and that each Member State has its own quota for individual fish stocks.
As for the data that the report is based on, we should remember that Member States have until the end of 2003 to report new figures and bear in mind that we still do not know how many ships are in the EU fleet. This is worrying and must be rectified. I welcome Mr Kindermann highlighting this.
My final point is that Member States should pass on information to the governments and parliaments in the Member States. Fishing is one of the mainstays of rural life in Scotland. I know that my constituents would want to ensure that the Scottish Parliament is kept fully and directly informed of developments at the European Union level.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should first of all like to thank my fellow MEP, Mr Kindermann for a sober and thorough report. The common guidance programmes for the fisheries fleet are the main problem in the common fisheries policy, since the European fleet is far too large. Last week, Commissioner Fischler stated that the fleet was 40% too big. This means that, at the moment, we are, with the one hand, providing money by way of decommissioning subsidies in an attempt to reduce the size of the fleet and, on the other hand, providing assistance for modernisation. Aid of this kind, together with modernisation, have led in recent years to a situation in which the combined fleet and total fisheries capacity have actually increased. It is a vicious circle which we need to break. In connection with the reform, we should probably therefore consider inaugurating a period in which we do not provide aid for modernising the fleet. I look forward to seeing the Commission's proposal on precisely this area, based on the principle that there are too few fish for too large a fleet. All the Member States must now comply with the joint resolutions, and we should really also reward those countries which have to date complied with the joint resolutions in the multiannual guidance programmes.
Mr President, I thank the rapporteur for his work in this area. It is clear that the capacity of the EU fishing fleet is greater than available resources and that therefore firm action is needed to allow many fish stocks to recover to sustainable levels. Reductions in the fleet are thus essential. The overall fishing effort must be controlled as well as fleet size so as to correspond to the resources available.
The Commission should better assess the impact of so-called exploited capacity by certain Member States who, at least on paper, claim to have met their MEGP target. The Commission should also ensure stricter enforcement of existing penalties on certain Member States so that the Member States themselves are penalised and not the fishermen.
I hope the House will support the amendment which was originally tabled in committee by my group colleague, Mr Nogueira because it is very important. Fisheries in certain areas of the European Union, including Scotland, are a devolved responsibility and it is important that direct communication between ourselves and devolved parliaments should be standard practice.
Mr President, Commissioner, just imagine if the European Union, in addition to the milk quota, were to develop a multi-annual programme for milking machines. To ensure that farmers did not produce too much milk, the number of milking machines was curtailed. One of the Member States appears to be duly adhering to its milk quota but still has too many milking machines after four years. Rapporteur Kindermann then proposes to penalise this Member State and to reduce its milk quota. Another Member State has the correct number of milking machines, but produces much more milk than its quota allows. Mr Kindermann seems not to have any problems with that at all. After all, that country has complied with the multi-annual guidance programme.
I am using this example to demonstrate the absurdity of the situation. The aim of the common fisheries policy is to maintain sustainable fish stocks. For this purpose, total allowed catches and quotas are introduced. The fleet structure is secondary to this. It is a bonus if the capacity is in line with the catch potential, but the capacity is not a goal in itself. In fact, the capacity is distorted by giving subsidies for modernisation and renovation. This smacks more of social policy than of economic policy.
A social policy is not something we should be ashamed of, but we should call a spade a spade. If we do not, the wrong Member States will find themselves in the dock. Which countries exceed their quotas? Are these not by any chance the countries that receive the highest subsidies for their fleets and duly meet the MAGP objectives?
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 25 April 2002.
Colleagues, on 6 May Pim Fortuyn, a Dutch politician and candidate in this week's general election in the Netherlands was shot dead in Hilversum. The same day, on my own behalf and on behalf of this House, I condemned this murder unreservedly and expressed our profound solidarity with the Dutch people and with the victim's family, friends and colleagues.
Freedom of expression is one of our most fundamental and cherished rights - a core value of our democracies. As democrats we defend the right of every person to participate in political life freely and to exercise his or her democratic right. That includes the right to express one's ideas, whether or not we like these ideas. That is precisely the basis of our democratic system.
In condemnation of this, and all acts of political violence whenever, wherever and by whomsoever they are perpetrated, I would like to ask you to observe one minute's silence.
President. On behalf of the European Parliament I should also like to welcome the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is a laureate of the Sakharov Prize of this House in 1990 and a Nobel Prize laureate of 1991. She has always been a figurehead for the fight for democracy, freedom and human rights in her own country in particular. This release and her right to again lead her party political life is a significant step forward to the establishment of democracy in Burma. I hope it will soon be followed by the release of Burma's remaining political prisoners.
I heard the call of Aung San Suu Kyi last week for a European Union common policy on Burma. I expressed the hope on behalf of our House that this release will be followed by the development of such a policy in active cooperation with the European Parliament. We look forward to welcoming her in the not too distant future in this Chamber to take her place and to speak on her own behalf where, in the past, it was her husband and others who spoke so eloquently for her.
Mr President, I had hoped that we would have the opportunity for an urgency on the subject of the plane-spotters (12 British and two Dutch nationals) who were convicted on 26 April at a court in Kalamata in Greece. They were given very severe sentences. I am speaking especially on behalf of my constituents, Paul and Lesley Coppin. They were found guilty of offences which were not an offence in their own countries. The sentences were totally disproportionate.
This throws doubt on any ambition to develop an area of freedom, security and justice in the European Union based on mutual trust between judicial systems. It certainly reveals potential flaws in the European arrest warrant.
Mr President, I should like to ask you to express our concern to the Greek authorities and urge them to expedite the appeal process for the plane-spotters with a view to quashing their convictions.
Mr President, I subscribe wholeheartedly to your opinion that we need to be careful as to how we intervene when a case is sub judice, as in the plane-spotters affair. And I am sure that it is sub judice, that appeals will be lodged and that, whatever people feel about the suffering of members of their constituency, the principle of the separation of powers is too serious a principle for us to call lightly for it to be challenged.
As far as the European arrest warrant is concerned, I really would be terrified if it were a question of Mr Van Orden's arresting me.
I regret that due to the pressure of the agenda, there is only time to discuss three urgent matters. I endorse the view that Mr Katiforis and yourself have put forward, namely that when we talk about the plane-spotters, we should not interfere in national criminal law policy, but this does indicate, however, that there is good reason for better harmonising the penalty for crimes at European level, particularly in the light of the measures that have been taken in the wake of 11 September. The Liberals wanted to submit an urgent motion on this matter, but this was unfortunately overtaken by other priorities. In the case of other urgent business, an urgent motion or resolution is submitted more or less every month, and in this connection, I regret that we do not put a European issue on the agenda.
I will take up this matter while at the same time bearing in mind the need to recognise the separation of powers between the political and judicial authorities.
Mr President, you will be aware of the great sense of shock at the fatal rail accident which took place last Friday at Potters Bar station in Hertfordshire, claiming the lives of seven people and injuring some 70 people.
While the accident investigations are still taking place, this is not the time to draw conclusions, but I hope that, on behalf of Parliament, you will send condolences and sympathy to the families of the bereaved by the way of the British authorities, and also encourage the Commission to continue its liaison work with the rail administrators in safety matters. This is an extremely busy commuter line; literally thousands of people travel on it each day. I, with many others, travelled the exact route the evening before. A few miles up the line is the site of the fatal accident which took place in Hatfield only 18 months ago. Therefore I believe your initiative in this regard would be greatly appreciated.
Mr President, on a point of order, you will be aware that almost one third of the Irish people sent in excess of 1 million cards to Tony Blair, the British Prime Minister, calling for the closure of the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant. Time and time again this nuclear plant has been found wanting, and most independent experts have clearly spelled out that it is highly suspect and unsafe.
Mr President, my comment refers to the point of order I made yesterday, which has been wrongly recorded in the Minutes. The Minutes say that I protested about the recent change to the Criminal Code in Slovakia. In fact an amendment has been tabled in an attempt to change the code; it has not been changed already and I would be obliged if this could be corrected.
Rest assured, Mr Alyssandrakis, the correction you request will be made.
Mr President, I asked for the floor yesterday, but my request was refused due to a lack of time. What I wanted to say was that even though, according to the information available, the possibility of an imminent attack by Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip cannot be discounted, never mind the carnage that will unleash, even though the ruling Likud party in Israel is open in its opposition to the creation of a Palestinian state and has passed a resolution to that effect and 13 Palestinian fighters have been expelled from their homeland as terrorists at Sharon's insistence, the Council has still not reached a decision and I have no idea which countries the Council will finally decide should accept these fighters.
My question is this: what will the status of these thirteen fighters be, wherever they end up, and is there any possibility of their being returned at Israel's request, which would, of course, be criminal. Also, does the European Union intend to continue to aid and abet the regime in Israel, in blatant disregard of the European Parliament's resolution that the partnership with Israel should be suspended, and does it intend to continue funding and arming this criminal regime?
Thank you for your intervention, Mr Korakas but for the moment, as you know, we are discussing the Minutes and the order of business. There is a whole debate on the Middle East on the agenda. The questions which you have just put relate to the debate on the Middle East scheduled for tomorrow.
Mr President, as far as I know, given how times are allocated, I shall not have a chance to speak. If you wish to arrange for us to be given even just a minute to restate these questions, then gladly.
Mr Korakas, I have no wish to get involved in a detailed discussion of how speaking times are allocated. You know full well that there are rules which apply. What I would point out is that the questions you have put are material questions which relate to the debate on the Middle East, not the order of business or the Minutes, which is what we are discussing now.
The next item is the vote on the request for a topical and urgent debate on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing specific access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks [COM(2002) 108 - C5-0135/2002 - 2002/0053(CNS)]
Mr President, regarding this request from the Council in respect of a Commission proposal for a Council regulation establishing specific access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks, I would like to say that I have consulted with the rapporteur, and I call on the House to reject this request.
Deep-sea stocks are fished stocks caught in waters beyond the main fishing grounds of continental shelves. They are distributed on the continental slopes or around sea mounts. These species are slow growing and they are particularly vulnerable to over-exploitation. Since fisheries for these species have developed in recent years, it is necessary to establish a management system to ensure that their exploitation is sustainable. The scientific advice that we have received indicates that the most appropriate conservation measures for these species would be based on effort limitation and, in certain cases, on reduction.
This proposal introduces elements of a system for the management of fishing effort directed at these deep-sea species. It also includes elements for the collection of data and support of scientific assessment and appropriate management. Under this proposal, fishing effort will be limited to recent levels and improved data will be made available for scientific assessment. The Commission intends to propose further elements of an effort management system, as required by scientific advice in due course.
The proposal is complemented by a separate Commission proposal to restrict catches by means of quota management. This is an urgent and important matter, but it is one on which, until now, no Community action has been taken. It therefore requires very careful consideration by our Fisheries Committee. The Council's request for urgency was received on the 3 May, while our first exchange of views on this is only scheduled for 22 May. Given the lack of action by the Commission to date, I do not think it seems unreasonable to allow a few months for parliamentary scrutiny. It also seems to me bizarre that the Council should request urgency in this matter when our understanding is that the President-in-Office of the Council has himself been involved in attempts to derail the timetable of publication of the CFPE reform proposals.
Therefore, I call on the House to vote against this request for urgent procedure.
Thank you, Mr Stevenson, for your contribution against the motion.
No one appears to wish to argue in favour of the motion.
Preparation for the EU/Latin America Summit (Madrid, 17/18 May 2002)
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparation for the EU/Latin America Summit, which is to be held in Madrid on 17 and 18 May 2002.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in June 1999 the first Summit of Heads of State and Government between the European Union, Latin America and the Caribbean took place in Ro de Janeiro on the initiative of France and Spain. During this Summit, Spain offered to host a second one which was agreed at the time, and which furthermore would coincide with the Spanish Presidency of the European Union.
Therefore, as planned, the Summit will take place in Madrid on the 17th and 18th of this month, that is, on Friday and Saturday of this week.
The profound changes which took place in European and in the Americas during the 90s and the mutual desire to establish a general framework for bi-regional relations were the prime motives for staging the Ro Summit. At the end of that Summit, the Heads of State and Government adopted two important documents: the Ro Declaration, which established the general principles to be applied to relations between Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and a second document, designated as an Action Plan, which identified the 55 priority areas in the political, economic, cultural, educational and social fields, amongst others, which should form the basis for a strategic bi-regional partnership between the two sides of the Atlantic.
Through this Madrid Summit, the European Union, Latin America and the Caribbean are committing themselves to deepening this partnership so that both regions can together confront the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities offered by the new 21st Century.
In Madrid, the Heads of State and Government propose to adopt three documents: an evaluation report recording what has been achieved since the Rio Summit, a document presenting the increasingly numerous common positions and values we share, and, finally, a political declaration which, as well as announcing the consolidation of our strategic bi-regional partnership, will list the firm commitments made at the highest level by both regions in the political, economic and cooperation fields and which go further than the measures adopted at the first Summit.
Until 1999, relations between the European Union, Latin America and the Caribbean had been based on a mainly sub-regional approach. Political dialogue and cooperation were designed for the various sub-regional realities, in other words, dialogue was subdivided. We established the San Jos dialogue for Central America, the dialogue with the Andean Community, Mercosur, Icaricom, and apart from certain exceptions, such as Mexico and Chile, which had a particular specific relationship, practically all the dialogue centred on differing sub-regional units.
The Rio Summit had the merit of introducing this new bi-regional approach, which has undoubtedly added weight to relations between the European Union and the sub-regions and individual countries.
With a view to this second Summit, the Spanish Presidency has worked intensively to make substantial progress on the three strategic dimensions I have mentioned. Furthermore, we must stress that we have wanted this strategic relationship between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean from now on to be the framework or benchmark on which the European Union's relations with each of the subregional areas or individual countries of Latin America and the Caribbean will be built.
From the point of view of political dialogue, the European Union's priorities in relation to Latin America and the Caribbean, during the short period between the Rio Summit and today, have essentially been the strengthening of democracy and the Rule of Law, the defence of human rights, the fight against drug-trafficking, as well as the promotion of regional integration and coordination between the different positions of both regions in relation to the international agenda within the framework of international organisations and conferences.
At the Madrid Summit, both regions wish to take a further step, in not only a quantitative but also a qualitative sense, which would consist of a better structuring of political dialogue and a broader range of issues for discussion, which would also cover those not relating to regional problems. We hope that this step forward will lead to the development of a common approach to world issues.
From an economic point of view we should begin by stressing that the European Union is very different from Latin America and the Caribbean in economic and social terms.
The population of Latin America and the Caribbean is greater than that of the Europe of the Fifteen - I am not talking about the enlarged Europe, since that will clearly have a larger population - and on the whole it is very young, that is to say it comprises very low age ranges.
Average per capita income in Latin America and the Caribbean is little over EUR 3 000 per year, while the average in the Union is seven times greater.
The bi-regional market continues to offer many opportunities for trade. Between 1990 and 2000 European exports have increased from approximately EUR 17 billion to EUR 54 billion, in other words they have almost trebled.
European imports from Latin American and Caribbean countries during that same period have increased from approximately EUR 27 billion to EUR 58 billion. In other words, they have doubled. Despite this spectacular increase in volume, imports originating from Latin America and the Caribbean have gone from 24% of the total in 1990 to just 12% of the total in 2000. In relative terms, trade between the two sides of the Atlantic is decreasing, but it is increasing within the American continent.
There has also been a considerable increase in direct European investment in Latin America and the Caribbean. The European Union is currently the biggest investor in the region. Investments have risen from EUR 66 billion in 1997 to EUR 122 billion in 1999, which represents almost 11% of all European foreign investment and almost two-thirds of European investments in non-OECD countries. This investment, Mr President, is a great reflection of the European Union's confidence in and commitment to the whole Latin American and Caribbean region and without doubt makes a great contribution to the growth of economic activity and the creation of employment in that region.
Furthermore, and above all, the Europe of the Fifteen shares deep historical, political and cultural roots with Latin America and the Caribbean, which help in the development of a genuine identity and a genuine strategic partnership.
These common positions and values are creating important ties in terms of identity and solidarity and are encouraging both regions to exchange more and more of their own experiences and to combine their resources in order to resolve common problems.
Amongst the challenges which the European Union and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean must face is the need to modernise education systems, to create an economic and social climate favourable to sustainable development and to establish mechanisms for good governance.
The promotion of a strategic partnership cannot be based purely on a common identity, whether this be historical, cultural or political, but must be the result of a shared interest in order to turn principles, values and objectives into practical mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation, so that the two regions can confront all the great challenges of this new millennium in a united fashion.
On the 17th and 18th in Madrid, the Heads of State and Government of the 48 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union who will attend the Summit - let us remember that this Summit of Heads of State and Government is the largest and broadest to be held in the Union, since we are talking about 48 Heads of State and Government - are going to try to give significant impetus to the strategic bi-regional partnership, which, as I said earlier, began in Ro de Janeiro in 1999.
In each of the strategic pillars on which this partnership is based, the political, the economic and cooperation in the social, educational and cultural fields, both regions have wanted to take a significant step forward. I would like to make a special mention of the joint fight against terrorism, through compliance with all the international conventions in this field, as well as the application of all the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Efforts will continue to strengthen democratic institutions and the Rule of Law, paying particular attention to human rights and the strengthening of judicial systems, with a view to guaranteeing the equal treatment of all people before the law. Equally, account will be taken of the entry into force of the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court which, as the honourable Members are aware, has been ratified by many Latin American and Caribbean countries.
The intention is to strengthen political dialogue and consultation within the United Nations system, as well as other international fora, on the most important issues on the international agenda.
In terms of economic and commercial issues we must stress that on 25 April we were able to successfully complete the process of negotiating an association agreement between the European Union and Chile. This is a free trade agreement between the two parties. It is truly innovative in economic terms, unquestionably the most advanced of all those reached between the European Union and other third countries and there has been no hesitation in describing it as a fourth-generation agreement. It is perhaps the free trade agreement that has dealt with the highest number of issues and included the highest number of considerations and there is no doubt that this opens the way for other agreements of this type, both in that region and in other parts of the world. We should remember, however, that in that region we are trying to establish a free trade agreement between two regions of economic integration - the European Union and Mercosur - and therefore the agreement reached with Chile sets a precedent for something truly historic; the establishment of a free trade agreement between two common markets or between two regions of economic integration.
Since it is relevant here, I would also like to mention the recent approval by the General Affairs Council of a proposal for future European Union relations with the Andean Community and with Central America which opens the way for the consideration of the creation of free trade areas between the European Union and both regions and in order to intensify not only cooperation but also political dialogue, which is an added value which did not exist previously in the agreements with these countries.
We all know that the difficult internal situation being experienced by certain South American countries is hindering the complex negotiations for a partnership agreement between the European Union and Mercosur which I referred to earlier. The truth is that the Summit wishes to acknowledge the results of the negotiation, in which the political, institutional and cooperation chapters have been completed and the small amount of progress which has been made in the fields of commerce and the measures for facilitating commerce so that we do not abandon this important project of a future free trade agreement between Mercosur and the European Union.
The first item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0151/2002 by Mihail Papayannakis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and European Parliament entitled 'Ten years after Rio: preparing for the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002? [COM (2001) 53 - C5-0342/2001 - 2001/2142(COS)];
A5-0142/2002 by Paul Lannoye, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the Commission communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the regions entitled 'Towards a global partnership for sustainable development? [COM (2002) 82- C5-0173/2002 - 2002/2074(COS)].
Mr President, the subject of this debate is sustainable development and the political message which Parliament wants to send out - both itself and via the European Union as a whole - to the Johannesburg Summit next August, ten years after Rio.
It would be very tempting to list the issues and problems of sustainable development and the future of sustainable development at length, but there is just such a list in the report and in the resolution proposed by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy. So I shall refrain from doing so. I mainly want to explain the logic behind the political message we want to send out.
So let us begin with the bottom line and the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, 10 years after Rio, is clearly in the red. With the exception of Kyoto, no progress has been made either with the environment per se - in fact there have been setbacks - or with the state of the world in general. Poverty has not been eradicated or reduced; on the contrary it is rising and we know full well that, with so many people living below the poverty line, there is no point in talking about protecting productive resources, renewable sources of energy and so on. The bottom line is in the red but no one accepts any responsibility for it. Perhaps they will do so in Johannesburg; it would be a useful exercise because it might throw some light on what we need to do in the future, because the future is not looking too rosy. The population on this planet is exploding, all the statistics say so. The pressure on resources is increasing as a result of globalisation and other factors, and both environmental and social cohesion problems look set to get worse.
So what should we be doing? What should we be talking about in Johannesburg? I think we all agree that whatever the definition of sustainable development, it must include development, social cohesion and environmental protection. The to-do list is clear on this count, I think we all agree. We talk about changing production and consumption standards, we talk about eradicating poverty, we talk about mainstreaming the environment in all policies, in farming, fisheries, industry, energy, tourism, water and air policies, but we have no objectives, timetables, indicators to tell us if we have reached our targets, mechanisms, capital, and the means to move and control the use of resources. This is where the problems lie.
The report and the resolution contain numerous proposals on reducing poverty, on renewable sources of energy and on countless other points which all require resources, institutions, rules, proper local, national and global management, political management. It is this management that will, I think, be the main problem in the future. Reforming the international system of Bretton Woods institutions and of more recent institutions such as the World Trade Organisation, for example when their rules clash with environmental protection. Reforms so that poor people can farm, agricultural reforms, for example, to give them water, energy, the rudiments needed to move to a modern perception of environmental protection and, of course, government action. As we know, the United States are loath to make any kind of commitment. They are also distancing themselves from those who have. The role of the European Union is the sixty-four thousand dollar question. The European Union will be able to play a part for quite some time to come, but not for ever. And if it is going to play its part, it needs to put its own house in order. It needs to do more to promote environmental protection and social cohesion policies. To table commitments at international organisations in which it has enough clout to achieve some degree of success, to be a reliable partner, internationally and with the third world, so that we can hope for some sort of improvement post Johannesburg and so that, in ten years' time, we do not find ourselves in the same situation we were in 30 years ago.
It was in Rio in 1992 that the international community established the concept of sustainable development. There is no doubt that in the intervening ten years the language used in speeches on the environment and development has changed, and changed for the better. Solemn undertakings have been made and conventions have been signed - if not ratified, at least signed - but we must also note, ten years on, that the situation on the environmental front has not improved, it has deteriorated, and that where poor and developing countries are concerned there has been no improvement there either. The inequalities have continued to increase: today, more than 800 million people are still undernourished and a billion people do not have access to drinking water. This is surely a state of affairs which cannot be tolerated.
Johannesburg, which will take place in a few months, will not only be a time for taking stock; it will also be the moment of truth. It is not enough to have a ceremonial preaching of environmental values, which would be a repeat of what was said in Rio. Neither is it enough to have a chorus of lamentations: we need on the agenda a programme of ambitious political change for the next ten years. That, in any case, is the message which the Committee on Development and Cooperation has asked me to pass on to you.
What we are proposing is that we make the overall priority the fight against poverty and hunger and the fair and sustainable use of natural resources. The message that we are sending to this House, to the Commission and to the Council is focused on five chapters: the first is fighting poverty and promoting social development, and it contains a whole series of specific proposals.
The second is about harnessing globalisation. What does this mean? It means quite clearly that sustainable development must take precedence. Trade legislation, the rules of international trade and rules on investment must therefore be made subject to sustainable development criteria, and not the other way round.
The third is the sustainable management and conservation of natural resources. This will require the development of new technologies and here I am thinking in particular, where energy is concerned, of renewable sources of energy. The proposals that we make in this regard are both credible and ambitious.
The fourth chapter is related to something the Commission said itself in the first document it published last year, that it was necessary to change production and consumption patterns. This is true, but it will require us to make some hard choices. I think, for example, that as far as we are concerned, some European Union policies - and I am thinking in particular of the common agricultural policy, the fisheries policy and the trade policy - will need to be reviewed if we are to avoid their running counter to the objectives of sustainable development. Furthermore, it will give us much greater credibility at international level, especially at the Johannesburg conference, if we put our own house in order before saying what needs to be done at international level.
Our fifth and final point is that we need to ensure that there is good governance at all levels. The concept of good governance is often tainted with paternalism. I believe that if it is applied at all levels of decision-making, and in particular at the level of international institutions, the use of this term will become more credible. I think, for example, that the international economic institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the World Trade Organisation, need a serious facelift so as to introduce a minimum of democracy and a minimum of public and political oversight.
That, in essence, is the message which the Committee on Development wishes to see this House and the Commission - I turn here to Commissioner Nielson - take away with them, because in a few weeks' time, there is a key date: the meeting in Bali, the last preparatory meeting before the Johannesburg Summit. So far, we have no cause for optimism because there is still no document on the table and up for discussion which shows real ambition. I therefore hope that our contribution will help the European institutions to play a leading role in this preparatory meeting, if there is still time, and in any case I hope that we will avoid giving the impression of thinking that handing over the responsibility for managing the problems related to sustainable development to partnership initiatives with the private sector is the way to resolve the problem. It may form part of the solution, but it has to be in addition to the commitments made by individual States and by the international institutions and not instead of them. This is what I wanted to say, Mr President.
Mr President, on behalf of the committee, I should like to warmly welcome both reports and thank the rapporteurs for their excellent work. It is clear that the EU should be playing a leadership role in Johannesburg. Our own treaty commitments oblige us to do so, and European citizens expect us to do so. That means that the Council and the Commission must listen to Parliament's views and respond to them, because it is clear that Parliament wishes to see measures that are both ambitious and more targeted. The Development Council and the Seville Summit should therefore insist on a proper revision of the Commission's communication in order to address existing gaps, add timetables for implementation and develop action plans for each measure. We do not need any more monitoring of the problem: we are in danger of going down as the only species that monitors its own extinction instead of taking steps to prevent it. We need bold, imaginative action plans and we need them now.
The Commission rightly identifies what it calls a global governance gap, with global market forces running far ahead of the ability of institutional mechanisms to contain them. And yet the measures which the Commission proposes to close that gap are woefully insufficient. In particular, the Commission's disproportionate emphasis on free trade and investment as engines for development should be balanced with far stronger commitments to binding frameworks for corporate accountability. As a first step we are proposing a directive on mandatory social and environmental performance.
WTO rules must also be reformed to allow governments to make the vital distinctions that need to be made between products on the basis of the way in which they have been produced. How else can we move towards more sustainable production and consumption practices?
It is hard to overstate the importance of urgent action at Johannesburg. It has been estimated that if we continue with our current production and consumption patterns we will soon need an extra three planets in order to provide the necessary resources and absorb the wastes. We do not have three planets; we have just one planet, and it is already showing signs of major degradation. Johannesburg has to deliver results.
Mr President, Commissioner, we cannot allow the Johannesburg Summit to be just an event to mark the ten years since Rio de Janeiro. There is little to celebrate, anyway, since over these ten years the signs of unsustainability have got worse. Rather, the Johannesburg Conference gives us the opportunity to start all over again, making a world-wide commitment to a development model that blends the economic dimension with both the social dimension and the environmental dimension.
In any case, there is a further difficulty associated with the Rio de Janeiro Summit. This time, we shall be even more alone in the leadership of a global agreement. The political agenda that the European Union defines will, therefore, be critical for the success of the conference. I believe that both the Commission communication and the Papayannakis and Lannoye reports contribute to making this a good agenda. There are, however, certain paragraphs and a few amendments that, in our view, take away some of the objectivity and detachment of Parliament's resolution - I mean the Tobin tax and writing off the debt of the developing countries. Even so, the PPE Group will vote for the final resolution.
We hope the following objectives will be achieved at the Johannesburg Summit. First of all, it should mark the coming into force of the Kyoto Protocol. For this to happen, some countries need to speed up their ratification of the Protocol - Russia, Japan, Canada and Australia. Secondly, the political conditions must be created for the United States to rejoin the joint effort in the environmental field. Thirdly, an initiative is needed to green the economy by internalising environmental costs, dissociating economic growth from intensive resource use and focusing on cleaner technologies. Fourthly, we hope that the Summit will provide joint answers to global problems and that, as happened in Rio de Janeiro, when the foundations were laid for the Conference on Climate Change, Johannesburg will also lay the foundations for protocols and new institutions in other environmental areas, such as water, for instance. Fifthly, we hope a boost will be given to international governance and institutional reform. It is not possible to create an Internet for sustainability if the nodes in this net are obsolescent.
Lastly, Mr President, we hope that this Summit will not content itself with vague intentions but will set out timetables, goals and policies.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament which was adjourned on 16 April 2002
I should like to take this opportunity to welcome a delegation of Brazilian parliamentarians who have taken their seats in the official gallery. The delegation is led by Mr Foscarini and has been visiting Parliament during the past week. I hope that their visit has proved interesting and informative. You are very welcome.
It also gives me great pleasure to welcome among us a group of students from the College Jean Zay in Lens in France, along with their teachers and the Mayor of Lens, Mr Guy Delcourt. They have constructed in their school a unique giant Euro coin which I understand is now in the Guinness Book of Records and on show at the French Finance Ministry. I want to thank them for their efforts and again say how welcome they are in this House today
As regards today's agenda, I want to inform the House that Mr Corts, Secretary of State for international cooperation in Latin America, cannot be here before 5.30 p.m. The Council and Commission statements on the EU/Latin-American Summit will therefore begin after 5.30 p.m.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Group of the Party of European Socialists requested that today's agenda include a statement by the Council and the Commission on the common fisheries policy at the beginning of today's sitting. Not only did it request this statement, it also requested a statement by the Commission and the Council on the common fisheries policy and on how the decisions behind the common fisheries policy are taken. We requested this statement because the public is under the impression - an impression which the Spanish Government and its Minister of Agriculture have helped to create - that a Member State's government exerted an influence or pressure on one or more members of the Commission when these decisions were being taken.
That alone would be highly significant, given the relevance of this procedure to European law, which is why an explanation by the Council and the Commission on the matter, by which I mean on how these decisions are taken, would appear to be in order. And we are doubly convinced that an explanation is in order following the article on the Commission's decisions in today's press and the massive criticism of the Commission's decisions voiced in an open letter by the Commissioner in question, Commissioner De Palacio, who was clearly put under pressure by her government and who obviously did not attend the crucial meeting of the Commission in person. We saw the smoke at the time and now there appears to be a fire, which is why a debate in Parliament is called for, but not before the Council and the Commission have made a statement.
The Council is not here but could easily make a statement on its understanding of how these decisions come about at the forthcoming plenary sitting in Strasbourg. But the Commission representative might at least add to today's statement on the common fisheries policy an explanation of how these common decisions are taken .
Mr President, I would have kept my peace, had Mr Schulz refrained from making these comments. I have no wish to make a snap judgment of the conduct of the government referred to by Mr Schulz, let alone the conduct of a member of the Commission. But, my dear Mr Schulz, your comments would have had more credibility had you also criticised the fact that, when it was in line for a blue letter, the German Government put so much pressure on the Council of Ministers that in the end the letter was not sent.
You would have been more credible had you also had something to say when a member of your party in the Commission - I shall not name names because I do not want to open a can of worms - infringed Commission regulations. Please be assured that I have no wish to rake over old ashes. But you are being selective in your complaints and that casts doubt on your credibility, although it does not undermine what may well be well-founded criticism of the conduct of individual governments or Commissioners. That is all I have to say. We agreed that Commissioner Fischler should make a statement today. Commissioner Fischler is most welcome. But we should not make party political capital out of his statement.
Mr President, it is sometimes hard to keep a clear head when grievances fill the air and I think we are seeing the results of that. It is clear that certain allegations have been made about the activity of certain Commissioners and others in a case involving fisheries, but this matter has been considered by the Conference of Presidents. The Fisheries Committee has been asked to look into it and report back to the Conference of Presidents and I understand that the Budgetary Control Committee is also looking into it. It is important that we allow due process to take place in Parliament before raising these issues in plenary.
It is also important that we do not mix the question of these allegations with a very important communication that the Commission has brought forward on the future of the common fisheries policy on how to safeguard fish stocks for future generations. So I would ask you, Mr President, to ask Mr Schulz, on behalf of the Socialist Group, to bring this back to the Conference of Presidents in due course.
Mr President, two points. First, we did in fact agree in the Conference of Presidents to discuss both issues. We wanted to discuss them separately but we were told, no, it had to be in conjunction with the Commission statement. You just have to agree at some point on what it is you want. We are prepared to discuss it one way or the other. But what we do not agree with is someone telling us, every time we decide something, that it has to be done the other way round and then turning it all round again!
Secondly, on the question of government intervention. It may come as a surprise, but you are right to criticise the German Chancellor and he is right to criticise the government ...
... that is what I am saying! Except that the Commissioners do not represent their governments, they represent the interests of the European Union. The ministers represent governments and we have to make that perfectly clear to all our governments. So instead of sitting here trying to represent parties and governments, let us join with the Commission in representing the interests of the European Union. Agreed? Agreed!
Mr President, could I just remind all the Members in this House that whilst we may have difficulties or disagreements with regard to procedures or undue interference directed against individual Members of the Commission or anybody else, the most important issue we are discussing here today is the livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of people involved in the fishing industry.
These people want to ensure that they can continue in their role as fishermen feeding all the peoples of Europe and maintain strong, rural coastal communities. This bickering about procedures, individual issues or political issues does us no credit as a Parliament. We are supposed to represent the interests of the people within the European Union, not simply political blocs trying to score points.
So let us listen to what Commissioner Fischler has to say, and attack or support the policy. Let us work with real issues not with esoteric issues concerning political point-scoring.
Mr President, the Minutes wrongly state that, following the report on, and description of, the attack on Mrs Kla, I had simply called on the President to take disciplinary steps. Although true, that is only half the truth. In addition, I publicly called on him to lay charges before the responsible law enforcement agencies against the employees of this House who made themselves liable to criminal proceedings for failing to give assistance when Mrs Kla was attacked. I request that the Minutes be amended accordingly.
Mr Mombaur, I myself witnessed both Mrs Kla's joinder of issue and your own. I do indeed recall that you raised this point about the failure to provide assistance. I can inform you and the House that the Bureau considered this case yesterday and that there will be a written report, which will lay bare all the matters connected with it. I therefore request my small staff here to add to the Minutes - page 17 in the German version - what Mr Mombaur said about this matter of the failure to provide assistance.
The next item is the report (A5-0162/2002) by Mr Herv Novelli on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a Council Regulation (COM(2001) 423 - C5-0438/2001 - 2001/0172(CNS)) on State aid to the coal industry.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission proposal to the Council of 25 July 2001 on State aid to the coal industry has a certain number of good qualities and one slight defect.
The first of the good qualities is the fact that it is essential. The second is that it really is an important step in the right direction for the coal industry. The slight defect is that it contains a certain number of inaccuracies which have not been removed at the committee stage.
This proposal is essential because the previous arrangements will expire in July 2002, hence the need for a new regulation. Above all, it is essential because of the expiry of the ECSC Treaty, which is the legal basis of the previous arrangements governing aid to the coal industry. The restructuring of the coal industry in Europe has not been entirely completed, so there can be no question of not having a new regulation on these arrangements for State aid. This proposal is also a step in the right direction insofar as it makes provision for production aid to cease in 2007. In fact, I believe that it is inevitable and desirable to make provision for the cessation of this aid, since coal and steel products will be re-integrated into the common law of the Treaty on European Union following the expiry of the ECSC Treaty.
My attention and the discussions in committee were concentrated on the revision, from my point of view, of this text, an important revision, because it consists of supporting the creation of what is known as an 'indigenous primary energy base' in order to preserve the European Union's independence regarding this product.
This creation is slightly surprising in a text which originally had only a technical purpose. In any case, it calls, and has called, for the following comments from me and from a certain number of other Members. Is Europe threatened if this indigenous primary energy base is not created? Is there any strategic interest in creating such a base? In other words, is coal strategic, and is indigenous coal production within certain limits strategic to the European Union?
My reply to these two questions is negative. I believe, and the experts agree with me, that the world coal market is characterised by both great dispersion of supply and great stability of prices in the medium and long-term. The risk of shortages is quite small. In addition, there are a number of products which could claim strategic status, and therefore the replies obtained from the Commission have led me, I regret to say, to propose that this revision be stated separately in this text in order to deal with this problem. The period of validity of this regulation is set to end in 2010. I had proposed that it should end in 2007, for the sake of consistency, because that was the year, in the Commission proposal, for ending production aid. I regret to say that the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy did not agree with me, and my report was rejected.
That being the case, I invite you to vote for this report on the original version of the Commission proposal because, despite its uncertainties, inaccuracies and obscurities, the proposed regulation is a step in the right direction, towards support for the restructuring of the coal industry, albeit for a limited period of time. I believe that this is how that support should be given, because it cannot continue indefinitely.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think that the proposal for a regulation, which the Commission submitted almost a year ago now, is a good and reasonable compromise between the conflicting interests that there have been in the Commission and in the Member States. What shows that it is not such a bad compromise is the fact that these conflicting interests and views were also, of course, present in Parliament and in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, and our agreeing, the second time around, to support this very Commission proposal, which is nearly a year old, says something about the proposal.
We - by which I mean my group - will in any case, when we eventually come to vote, be supporting it without amendment, and we will keep to what we agreed in committee. That notwithstanding, whereas Mr Novelli made a few critical comments from his standpoint, I do so, of course, from my own, for any agreement on the details does not indeed prevent us from having outlooks that differ overall. If the translation is accurate, Mr Novelli, you twice spoke in terms of the Commission proposal envisaging the cessation of production subsidies in 2007. That is not actually the case; rather, production subsidies are to continue until 2010. That is right and proper. Closure aid is to come to an end in 2007. I do, though, have a small problem with that, in that, in view of our desire for a strategic base of this sort and, of course in retrospect, the need for capacity to be adjusted as well, I can very well imagine that we will also need aid for closure and reconstruction, especially if it is maintained that this base, too, has to be underpinned by laws on the grant of aid. No single Member State, no matter which one, can do as it pleases about this, but it must, both before and after 2010, be monitored by the Commission in accordance with the laws on subsidies.
I have a few difficulties with the phasing out of aid as well. It is indeed the case that they have to be marked down on a sliding scale. What the Commission is proposing appears to me to be a bit too mechanical. On this point, I would recommend to the Council that they should just think a bit about whether they can refer back to what the ECJ decided when they ruled on the subject in 1998.
My last point has to do with the clause about the post-2007 assessment, which was mentioned in the proposal. We should think again about that as well; otherwise, our approval of the Commission proposal is unconditional.
Mr President, the Novelli report on the coal industry in the European Union was, as you are aware, rejected by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on 23 April. That report, far from helping to reach a consensus around the European Commission proposal, which was viewed by the majority of the members of our committee as balanced and comprehensive, meant sudden death for the European coal industry.
On the one hand it meant cutting aid to companies in the sector, and reducing the periods within which our industry could receive that assistance. Given the importance of the issue, particularly for the families and regions that depend solely on that activity in the European Union, the majority of the members of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy came to an agreement on a fair and balanced consensus text that is none other than the draft regulation from the European Commission. That regulation envisages maintaining aid to that sector at least until December 2007. During that period the European Commission will evaluate the development of the sector, both at Community level and at world level, and if necessary will put forward fresh proposals.
On the other hand, it should also be remembered that this date is in some way subordinate to the security of energy supply that the European Union needs, as this is a factor that the European Commission will undoubtedly take into account when formulating new proposals. We think that this is an important subject that should be treated as a priority.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Novelli's original report was rejected because when voting on the amendments we realised that the final text was completely incoherent. On the one hand it had incorporated the positions of those who wished to remove aid to this industry, which is fundamental for energy supply and for social cohesion in our countries, while on the other hand others among us would have liked to go further and have greater certainty about what is going to happen after 2010.
For this reason, the report was rejected in committee and as the chair I was given the task of conducting the necessary negotiations to solve the problem, because we would have been unable to deliver an opinion on the Council's decision. This was why I contacted Mr Novelli, as he had already worked on this report, and also, out of parliamentary courtesy, I thought it was appropriate to consult him as to whether he wanted to put forward the only text that could receive a consensus, which was the Commission's text, and Mr Novelli agreed, which I thank him for. He thinks it is a step in the right direction, as do I. He thinks that it goes too far and I do not think that it goes far enough but it is, however, the only possible text, and we therefore think that we should give it majority support and comply with the agreement between the different groups, which is not to adopt any amendments modifying the Commission's text.
Now the ball will be in the Council's court and we hope that it will adopt a solution that is in line with the Commission's proposal.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 30 May 2002.
As you know, colleagues, the principle of transparency is enshrined in the first article of the Treaty on European Union. Its coming into force has heralded a new era in which decisions are to be taken openly, as visibly and as close to citizens as possible. This is designed to ensure greater legitimacy, greater accountability and more efficiency of public authorities in the democratic system.
On 30 May 2001 Parliament adopted under codecision Regulation 1049/2001 on public access to documents of Parliament, the Council and the Commission. The regulation required the institutions to open not later than 3 June 2002 a register to which citizens have electronic access.
I am very pleased today to be able to announce on behalf of Parliament that that register was opened to the public on 3 June 2002 on our website. It is available at the regular web address of "europarl.eu.int/register". 24 000 documents are already available on that site. The uploading of Parliamentary documents for that register continues at a significant pace. This is a crucial instrument for reinforcing our democratic principles, very much in line with fundamental rights as set down in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights. It is fitting that our House should be at the forefront in European terms in promoting this degree of transparency.
Mr President, last week, some of us were given a demonstration of how the documents are now available.
As a former rapporteur, together with Mr Cashman, I have to say that our Administration, our services, deserve a great deal of the credit for the efficient manner in which they have now put this procedure in progress. I hope that the teething troubles will soon be overcome. However, sterling work has been done, and we should be able to say so once in a while.
Mr President, as co-rapporteur on the report on access to documents, I should like to echo Mrs Maij-Weggen's words. We have a modest beginning but we are sending the signal that transparency and accountability are the only ways in which to connect the citizen to the European project.
I should like to compliment the staff who have worked tirelessly to do this. It is a reminder to this House that without the commitment of the staff and the services we would achieve nothing.
I have received a request from 34 Members to postpone every item on the agenda to our July part-session.
Mr President, as all the Members know, we are risking our health in attending this part-session, and we are risking the health of those working for us and the health of visitors to Parliament too. This is clear from the tests which have revealed the presence of Legionella, it is clear from the fact that several Members have fallen ill, and this is an illness with very serious consequences for physical health.
Only a modicum of common sense is needed to see that we should have held this part-session in Brussels, in complete tranquillity, and if we had done so this speech would just have been a speech on the minimum safety conditions necessary for Parliament. However, I regret to say that we are a parliament which is not free even to decide on this matter. I call upon each and every Member to vote for the proposal to postpone all the reports to the next part-session. This is both a problem of safety, health and hygiene for all of us and for the people who work with us, and a problem of the dignity of Parliament, which should have the right to meet when and where it wishes. This is what we are about to vote on. I call upon each Member, irrespective of recommendations and party lines, out of the modicum of common sense which this situation, this state of affairs, requires, in the name of that precautionary principle which we are constantly invoking in reports on health, the environment or other matters, out of respect, if not for ourselves, for the people who work with us and for the people who visit Parliament, I repeat, I call upon you to postpone all the reports to the next part-session.
Mr President, I think those of you who know me in this House, will know that I am not one to make a fuss. But this is a big public health issue and I want to speak firstly from personal experience.
Last autumn, following the first session back after the summer, I was very ill for some four weeks, culminating in a week in hospital. Those who looked after me told me that as far as they were concerned it was legionella. I was in no doubt that I caught it when I came back to this Parliament after the summer recess. A number of other colleagues have told me that they had had similar, though not such severe, symptoms. The problem is that we all go back to our own doctors in our various home towns and therefore any links between our symptoms and this House are perhaps lost.
I feel that we have to take this extremely seriously. It is not just our health, but the health of our staff and the many visitors in this House that is at risk. I am told we will not have hot water. If we do not have hot water, how can food be prepared safely and hygienically on these premises?
I thought very carefully about coming this week. I decided that of course I should come. We have a democratic duty to be here and perform our duties. But if anyone going away from this House this week, Member, staff or visitor, has symptoms, then those that run this House will be guilty of having let us come here this week and it will be their responsibility.
Mr President, this is not a question of nationality. I would also say the same thing if we were in Brussels. The main cause of health problems and mortality in all the Member States of the Union, in all developed countries, is iatrogenic contamination, in other words, contamination from being in hospital or from taking drugs.
This is one of the perverse effects of an over-developed society, whereby medicine that we take to make us better sometimes makes us ill. We are all familiar with this subject. We are not going to mention every illness we have ever suffered in another country. I am not going to say that, having spent four days in Berlin, I fell ill, which proves that you can contract some nosocomial illness there and that you must never go to Berlin again. So, in very simple terms, I shall ask this question. You mentioned visitors, but the visitors have been informed. If, like you, visitors come here, it is because they have chosen to come. When you say, Mrs Wallis, that we have a duty to be here - I would say that we have a duty to stay. What sort of image would we give of the European Parliament if we were so afraid that we sought to impose zero risk and create panic! It would be dreadful and would do no credit to us at all.
Colleagues, there are many people who would like to express themselves on this issue but we have a proposal and we have heard a speaker "for" and a speaker "against".
I should like to say that as soon as we had any indication that there was any question regarding this issue the College of Quaestors immediately, through Mr Poos, informed every colleague in the House. This was discussed last week at the Conference of Presidents in Brussels where we asked Parliament's services to what extent they felt assured, and reassured, that it was within our capacity to suggest that it would be a responsible decision to conduct our work here this week.
In addition - and I say this particularly to Mrs Wallis who said that we should take this extremely seriously - I take this extremely seriously. I insisted that the relevant authorities - who are not in the first instance Parliament's authorities - the company SERS, whose chair is the Mayor of Strasbourg, and the relevant health authorities, should give us a written attestation for something which in terms of liability clearly is a matter for the proprietors. The question of guilt or innocence was raised in one of the contributions but those are issues for courts.
Mr President, I hope that the House will not accept this request for urgency. I was rapporteur for the legal basis issue when this report originally came before the committee and this House. At that time it was proposed to create a common market organisation for ethyl alcohol alone. In committee that was amended to cover synthetic as well as agriculturally originating ethyl alcohol. The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, after studying it carefully, came to the view and reported back that there was no satisfactory legal basis that could be devised for that proposal.
On that account the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposed to this House, and the proposal was accepted, that the project be withdrawn for reconsideration by the Commission. Instead there was very quick reconsideration, and a substantial change. The Legal Affairs Committee, having had a look at it last week, concluded that the same objection concerning the legal basis applies because there is still an attempt, under Article 37, to bring together agricultural and synthetic ethyl alcohol.
This is unsatisfactory. Where a serious question has been raised about the legal basis, the committee responsible, upon considering a new solution to the problem, should surely once again ask for the legal basis issue to be properly looked at, not rush it through under urgent procedure.
Mr President, I cannot go along with the Liberals on this. I would inform you,
my dear Mr Schulz, that is simply because the Liberals indicated yesterday that they intended to reject it, and so I assumed that the honourable Member was among their number, but that is obviously an oversight. But that which is not, may yet be!
Turning to the matter in hand, I would like to inform you that this second Ayuso Gonzlez report refers to the Council's compromise proposal, which does not provide for a common organisation of the market, but only for a market regulation. This will result in Article 10 being dropped, as Article 10 states that national subsidies are prohibited in an organised market. That has lapsed, and so I ask you to agree to this urgent procedure.
With regard to the speech by Mr MacCormick, I would refer you to Rule 63(4) on the verification of the legal basis. Your comments will be taken into account in the vote on the content.
Mr President, I wish, on behalf of my group and also in consultation with all the shadow rapporteurs and with the coordinators of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to ask that my two reports on the rules on participation in the Framework Programme and the Euratom Programme and on dissemination of their results should be adjourned to the July part-session. Yesterday evening we succeeded, after intensive work, in reaching an agreement with the Council. It was not possible to have this agreement formally voted on in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, and so I now ask for consideration of both reports to be adjourned.
the Commission statement on the visit by the EU troika to Algeria and the signature of the EU-Algeria agreement;
and the report (A5-0175/2002) by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on relations between the European Union and the Arab Maghreb Union: a privileged partnership (2001/2027(INI)).
Mr President, the signing of the association agreement in Valencia on 22 April will give a new framework and new impetus to our relations with Algeria. The Commission encouraged Parliament to give its approval to this agreement as quickly as possible. The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy has already had a first exchange of views on this agreement.
The Commission shares most of the views expressed during this debate, especially as far as the human rights situation is concerned. In particular the issues of missing persons and access by certain human rights organisations to Algeria are worrying.
The troika, headed by Mr Pique, met last week in Algiers with Algerian authorities, and in particular with President Bouteflika and Mr Belkhadem, Minister for Foreign Affairs.
As Mr Pique has indicated, the political dialogue was rich, free and fruitful. It was the first troika visit since the signature of the association agreement, which opens a new chapter in our bilateral relations. The possibility of negotiating an interim agreement was considered, although there is no agreement on this for the moment.
The presidency expressed our satisfaction on the establishment of regular political dialogue, which will be reinforced when the association agreement enters into force. It was recognised that the recent parliamentary elections constituted substantial progress in the strengthening of the democratic process in Algeria.
The issue of human rights and missing persons was tackled, but unfortunately, taking into account the brevity of the meeting, too briefly. The Commission recalled that a list of missing persons was transmitted to the Algerian authorities and that the Commission was still waiting for a response from the Algerian Government.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I admit that I am a little surprised by the Commission statement on the troika visit; perhaps I will have the opportunity, in the second half of my speech, to describe the situation in Algeria.
General Morillon and myself are presenting a joint report on EU/Maghreb Arab Union relations. Mr Morillon, who is currently contesting an election campaign, is unfortunately unable to be here today, but his colleague, Mr Galeote Quecedo, will be standing in for him.
The aim of the report is to define the nature and the structure of EU/Maghreb Arab Union relations. By this, I do mean Maghreb, and not the individual countries of Arab Maghreb. That is the fundamental idea behind the report. Although we state there is a need to draw up reports on the situation of and relations with the individual countries, such as Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, Mauritania or other Maghreb countries, our original idea was to try to see if we could move forward relations between the South Mediterranean as a whole, as a possible collective subject, and the North Mediterranean, in other words, the European Union.
I am aware that some Members were not or are not entirely in agreement with the position that has been adopted. Although we have not discussed the specific situation in certain countries in this report, this is not because we believe that this would be the wrong approach, but because we feel that this approach is not suited to the structure of our report.
Preparation of European Council (Seville, 21/22 June 2002), including situation between India and Pakistan
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparation of the European Council in Seville on 21 and 22 June 2002, including the situation between India and Pakistan.
Mr President, I shall comment very briefly on the issue raised by Mr Van Orden. This Parliament is well aware that the Council has attended to the issue of Zimbabwe on various occasions and that this matter was addressed at the Barcelona European Council. I have been following the matter very closely and I can tell you that a General Affairs Council will be held next Monday. Let us hope that we can deal with the matter at Minister of Foreign Affairs level and should it prove necessary or appropriate, it could then be raised at the Seville European Council.
With regard to the Seville European Council, Mr President, from 21 to 22 June the second and last European Council of the Spanish Presidency of the European Union will take place in Seville. Five basic issues will be addressed at this Council: the process of economic reforms, as a follow-up to the Barcelona European Council; the current state of negotiations on enlargement, a process on which we have made substantial progress; issues of Justice and Home Affairs, in particular immigration policy; the debate on the future of Europe, with a report from the President of the Convention, Mr Giscard d'Estaing; and the issues of greatest concern in the context of the CFSP (Common Foreign and Security Policy).
I shall now briefly discuss the issues I have mentioned. I shall start with the economic issues - the follow-up to the Spring European Council. This follow-up will be one of the fundamental elements of this forthcoming European Council, since the Spring European Council laid down a programme and a follow-up for certain issues and established a set of tasks to be revised in Seville.
Barcelona represented the continuation of the process inaugurated at the Lisbon European Council, which focused on a programme of economic reforms in the aim of making the European Union the most dynamic and competitive region in the world in the context of the new economy of the information society.
In Seville, therefore, and as a follow-up to Barcelona, the following issues will be examined: firstly, Ecofin - which is due to meet on 20 June, before the European Council - will present a final report on the adoption of the broad economic policy guidelines. The Presidency intends to present a report on the current state of work on the tax package, which includes a range of initiatives on savings tax, energy tax and cooperation with tax authorities.
The issue of 'corporate governance' (the governance of businesses) will also be addressed. For this reason, the report by the high level working group on company law must discuss three issues: the role of non-executive directors and of boards of directors, company directors' pay and the board of directors' responsibility for preparing information about the company's finances.
Other issues left pending from the Barcelona European Council and which will be addressed by the Seville Council are: the simplification and improvement of regulations - known as 'better regulation'; economic services of general interest - the Commission will also present the report that has been requested of it; energy supply - on which it will present another report; telecommunications, education, research; the outermost regions and sustainable development.
The second major issue that I announced was that of negotiations on enlargement. Unless you ask me to provide further information, Mr President, I would prefer not to dwell on the issue of enlargement, since today a substantive debate is going to be held on the matter. Therefore, as enlargement will be the subject of a specifically scheduled statement this very evening, I think we could keep the debate short and leave this issue for later.
Issues of Justice and Home Affairs have been one of the main priorities of the Spanish Presidency of the Union. In Seville we will be pressing ahead on these issues in four main areas: firstly, a review of Community asylum and immigration policy will be undertaken - basically a review of the Tampere commitments - as well as an assessment of the situation and a clear programme to fulfil the commitments that we adopted in 1999 during the Finnish Presidency, as a consequence of the communitarisation of Justice and Home Affairs issues, formalised in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Secondly, the Heads of State and Government will be discussing a global plan to combat illegal immigration. Then there will be a discussion of a programme and a policy on protecting the Union's external borders. Lastly, a debate will be held on integrating migration policy into the Union's external actions.
With regard to the first issue I mentioned, the European Council, in line with the conclusions of the Tampere Council and of following Councils, is going to urge the Council to approve, within the deadlines laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam, the necessary legislative instruments to adopt a common asylum and immigration policy. This policy must respect the balance between a set of principles, such as the protection of refugees, the Union and the Member States' ability to receive asylum seekers and the integration of legal immigrants.
Secondly, the negotiations currently underway on adopting a common policy in the field of asylum and legal immigration will be given a boost if at the same time the Union develops a common policy to combat illegal immigration, which produces effective results in the short and medium term. For these reasons, on 28 February of this year, the Council approved its plan to combat illegal immigration. This will also be addressed by the European Council.
In addition to vigilance and closer monitoring of the borders and of border crossing points, one of the plan's aims is to prevent the illegal crossing of the external borders of the Member States of the Union, whilst at the same time ensuring that asylum seekers can exercise their right to ask for international protection. In this context, the communication that the Commission presented recently, entitled "Towards integrated management of the external borders of the Member States of the European Union" takes on particular importance.
Lastly, on the basis of the agreement reached at the Laeken Summit, in Seville the European Council will demonstrate its desire to integrate immigration policy much more deeply into the Union's external actions.
The guiding principle of external action in the field of immigration and asylum with the countries of origin and of transit must be a global, integrated and balanced approach, which uses all the Community and Member States' instruments in a coordinated way to establish a relationship of cooperation with a view to ensuring the joint management of migratory flows, and to address the underlying causes of these flows and of poverty, in order to incorporate this dimension into development aid policy. Something else that will be raised is the development of an external strategy for areas in the immediate vicinity of borders to cooperate in the management and control of migratory flows.
The other major package of issues, to which I referred at the beginning, is everything that concerns institutional affairs, the debate on the future of Europe and the reform of the Council.
There are essentially two matters of an institutional nature, on which we shall focus: the debate on the future of Europe and the reform of the Council of Ministers.
With regard to the first issue, the Convention on the future of Europe held its inaugural sitting on 28 February, as you will remember, because this took place in the seat of the European Parliament, and before Seville, the Convention will already have held five plenary sessions. Furthermore, I think we can draw some preliminary conclusions from the debates that have taken place to date.
On the one hand, the majority of the members of the Convention have shown themselves to be in favour of going more deeply into the process of European integration in a realistic way, in particular with regard to the distribution of competences. On the other hand, and in relation to the works of the Convention, the Presidium has agreed to set up six working groups, which are to present their conclusions between September and November.
In Seville, in line with the provisions of the Laeken declaration, the President of the Convention, Mr Giscard d'Estaing, will present an oral report on the progress achieved in the Convention's works.
With regard to the reform of the Council, and in accordance with the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council, the Presidency will present a report in Seville on improving its functioning and on reforms to make it more effective on the basis of the report submitted by the Secretary General of the Council, in the aim of ensuring greater transparency in the legislative process and in which practical measures for its adoption will be put forward.
I should like, of course, to clarify something that to me seems obvious, but which bears repeating, and that is that these Council reforms only refer to internal reforms, to internal organisation, and that in no case does the Council intend to address issues that require a reform of primary law, because this, of course, is a matter for the Intergovernmental Conference and for the European Convention preparing the Intergovernmental Conference. The Council will, therefore, be considering a set of practical reforms that will make the work of the European Council more rapid and more dynamic and which, furthermore, as you would expect, move towards the system employed by the Councils that support the European Council.
I hope that the European Council can now begin to attempt to simplify its administrative tasks so as to prepare the Union for a scenario in which, following enlargement, we will have 25 Member States.
Lastly, the European Council, as you would expect and as is the norm, will have to deal with the field of external relations focussing essentially on the following issues: firstly, the situation in the Middle East. On this matter the European Union will maintain its efforts to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict, by condemning the use of violence and by promoting conciliation as an instrument of joint action geared towards making progress in the economic, political and security spheres.
In particular, with regard to the crisis of the Church of the Nativity, the Council has been pleased at the resolution of this crisis in line with the memorandum of understanding signed by both sides. The Palestinians affected by the agreement have been transferred to various Member States of the Union - Spain, Belgium, Ireland, Italy and Portugal - to be accepted, for humanitarian reasons, in line with the common position reached by the Council on 21 May.
The adoption of this common position underlines the commitment of the European Union to achieving a lasting peace in the Middle East. I therefore believe that, in the context of these recent actions, the European Council will study the situation and will try once again to give impetus to the latest initiatives to be put forward by the High Representative, Mr Solana, for a Peace Conference to take place as soon as possible.
At the same time, the Council will study developments in issues of security and defence policy, in particular, in relation to the fight against terrorism and the follow-up to the Laeken mandate.
The next item is the report (A5-0154/2002) by Mrs Hedkvist Petersen, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission communication 'Pedestrian protection: Commitment by the European automobile industry' [COM(2001) 389 - C5-0537/2001 - 2001/2216(COS)].
Mr President, every year, 42 000 people die on the EU's roads. This is a very big political issue for people within the EU. In the White Paper on Transport, the Commission writes that we must halve the number of people killed by 2010. In that case, we must be active, not passive. We must take all kinds of measures at all levels. Everyone must help, especially industry, because we know that this is what consumers are demanding. The case for safety is self-evident.
How, then, must cars be designed so that they cause as little harm as possible to unprotected road users? The proposal for a voluntary agreement which we have obtained from the Commission and which the automobile industry has negotiated is inadequate. It is amazing that the Commission has seen fit to accept it in its current form. It is not always clear how it is to be implemented, and the EEVC tests are not taken seriously, in spite of the fact that they have been developed over a period of more than 22 years.
We are concerned here with survival on the roads and life in our society, and we must therefore be careful. The subject has been difficult to deal with, and I wish to thank all the shadow rapporteurs in the committee for a very successful piece of work which has demanded a great deal from us all. There have been many different opinions on the subject, many lobbyists and many points of view from the committees. It is now important to proceed on the basis of road safety and consumer demands.
We had three alternative responses to the Commission. The first was to accept the voluntary agreement. The second was to recommend a detailed directive, stating exactly how cars are to be designed. The third was to recommend a framework directive.
The committee does not believe that the voluntary agreement is sufficient. It is not provide enough certainty and does not offer scope for any grassroots parliamentary supervision of how the automobile industry assumes its responsibility. It is insufficiently binding, and its processes insufficiently transparent.
The committee therefore proposes a framework directive, as mentioned by the Commission too in its communication. It means that we in the political assemblies establish the objectives, whereupon experts oversee the implementation under the supervision, and with the participation, of the Commission.
The framework directive we are now proposing and calling for has a number of components. The objective is that, by 2010, all models of car should meet the requirements of the four EEVC documents. This process must be initiated now. The EEVC is the institution that has made the most progress in researching road safety throughout the world, especially in the area of pedestrian protection. We are, however, able to envisage other methods of testing which provide at least the same level of protection for pedestrians. There must of course be effective tests that influence car design.
We also want the process to be assessed regularly, with annual reports sent to the European Parliament. In that way, we shall be part of the process and be able to check that the goals we have set are really being met. We want the Member States, through their type approval authorities, to help assess how the framework directive is being implemented. We also believe that the EEVC has made the most progress when it comes to methods of testing and that it can make further progress in this area.
These are the demands made by the committee. We await confirmation from the Commission and Commissioner Liikanen that the latter will be tabling a proposal for a framework directive.
Within the Group of the Party of European Socialists, we should like to have gone still further in certain sections by, for example, placing significantly sharper emphasis upon the exclusive merits of the tests developed by the EEVC and by setting a clear subsidiary objective with a view to obtaining a straight line of development in pedestrian protection between now and 2010. The Group of the Party of European Socialists also wants the Commission to table its framework directive immediately, and preferably before the end of the year. That is important if the Commission wants to show that it is serious about the issue.
As I say, this is a very controversial matter. We have now reached a compromise and shall therefore support this in order to obtain as much backing as possible for the demand for a framework directive as the best solution where the issue of road safety is concerned.
My group will therefore only support the committee's proposal in the report, and I would urge other MEPs to do the same. We approve the compromise which, for the sake of road users, I am pleased that we were able to negotiate.
Mr President, I want to thank Mrs Hedkvist Petersen for putting together what is a balanced compromise that reflects interests across Parliament. Speaking as the rapporteur for my own committee - the Legal Affairs Committee - I can say that we were in favour of the Commission's proposal for a voluntary agreement and felt that the overall package achieved what Mrs Hedkvist Petersen wanted. It will save lives earlier than any other proposal. It also takes very seriously the need to improve design standards for cars. But - and this is a crucial issue she did not mention - it allows the industry, and everyone else involved, to tackle the issue on a broad front because we know that simply making the front end of cars more resilient in the event of a crash is a second option. We want to avoid collisions with vulnerable road users altogether through accident avoidance measures within the vehicle itself. Remember that anti-lock braking systems fitted as standard will be part of this package. We also have to look at road design, user education and many other things. This has to be a concerted effort.
I want to talk about design standards because this is important. I am an automotive engineer by background; I have seen the test laboratories; I have talked to the engineers about the problems of achieving more pedestrian-friendly cars. This is not a simple issue. Some groups have been guilty of gross over-simplification about the problems involved. Mrs Hedkvist Petersen implied that the industry was not taking it very seriously, but I know from my visits that it is.
Moving forward, she is right to say that we must look at a broad range of test measures. I call upon the industry this morning to join with the Commission to put together a team of all the best talents in engineering and design, together with all other interested persons, to come up with the best tests possible, given today's technology and not the 1998 technology on which the current EEVC tests are based.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start by very warmly thanking Commissioner Liikanen for the very important and forward-looking step the Commission has taken. We are all aware that, when problems crop up, the simplest way to deal with them is by means of incentives and assistance. The Sixth Framework Programme for Research, which we have adopted, contains many incentives to achieve improvements by the use of scientific methods. My second point is that we have standards, whether national or European, which give pride of place to the principle of mutual recognition and thereby make competition in the market possible.
The next stage, which is new and in fact sensational, is a voluntary commitment, whereby very strong pressure is brought to bear by both parties. An amicable settlement has to be reached, and additional criteria can be introduced in order to actually enforce such settlements. On the one hand, we have a simple contract, as originally planned, which of course involves risks and obligations for all parties to the contract and creates a number of problems, and on the other, we have the very slimline directive we are working on now, which we will use to do nothing more than draw up a timetable and lay down methods of supervision and assessment so that Parliament and the Commission can keep an eye on the progress made.
What I would like, and I believe that the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy would like it as well, is for this directive to amount to no more than one page. That would serve as an example of how we are constantly up to date in laying down principles and demonstrating how our work in lawmaking can also be slimline and forward-looking. Thank you, Commissioner; you have done an excellent piece of work.
Mr President, first of all, I should like to thank the rapporteur and also the European Commission. The European Commission has had the courage to present self-regulatory measures in order to get industry and governments to commit to greater pedestrian safety, which is also necessary, in fact. I come from a culture where self-regulation is very common. I am very much in favour of it, because self-regulation invariably entails the latest state of the art technology on which industry too can agree. Moreover, it can be a very quick process. The legislative process is always much more protracted. There is always one condition, namely that these self-regulatory agreements are monitored effectively.
If you ask me for my personal opinion - and this is also what Mrs Petersen said -I would have been satisfied with sound self-regulatory measures, and legislation would not have been by definition necessary. However, this is what Parliament has decided and I will have to reconcile myself to this decision. A skeletal directive is what we will end up with, one that leaves open plenty of opportunities to repeatedly lay down further regulations according to the latest state of the art technology. I am such a staunch supporter of self-regulation because in my view, a number of processes in the European Commission are too slow.
As a final point, I have stated in the recommendation by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy that something needs to be done about whiplash, although this is not at all related to this issue, but rather to a safety issue which also robs a huge number of people of their health. Moreover, it incurs a high level of costs in our society. Not for nothing have I included this as my final point. I know, after all, that far too little is happening in this area.
I have also asked questions in writing, upon which I receive the response that something will indeed be done. We have already discussed it in the context of the Fourth Framework Programme. Why does the handling of all these issues that are related to preventing accidents and preventing extra expenses in this area take up so much time? This has been going on since the Fourth Action Programme; we are meanwhile looking at the Sixth Research and Development Action Programme. Surely, something else should replace it.
I would ask the Commissioner not only to enter into consultation with industry very promptly in order to do something about this pedestrian protection, possibly by means of self-regulation, I would also ask him to tackle these other problems too.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 13 June 2002.
I have received a request from the PPE-DE Group and the PSE Group to replace Item 4 under Topical and Urgent Debate "Democracy in Afghanistan" with a new item: "The crisis in Argentina".
I would like to make a proposal: since we currently only have four items on the agenda for the topical and urgent debate and since the Rules of Procedure and common practice allow us to have five, I would suggest that we add the item on Argentina rather than replace it with another item.
Mr President, my group, the Group of the Party of European Socialists, would like to discuss Afghanistan and Cuba in September, provided that both points are well prepared in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Security and Defence Policy. We have a feeling that neither of these topics should be dealt with by singling out one item, but rather that this should be done thoroughly. Both topics can then be put on the agenda in September. This applies to both Cuba and Afghanistan. We therefore support the idea of replacing Afghanistan by Argentina.
Mr President, I would just like to say that our group fully supports Mr Wurtz's proposal and wishes to add Argentina to the topical and urgent debate. We must, of course, discuss Argentina since it is an urgent subject and urgent subjects do not always take the form of a speech. Events have occurred that I, for example, do not see in the same way as Mr Wurtz. Events have taken place, complaints have been made about what has happened in Afghanistan, and it is Parliament's role to discuss these and to try to clarify the situation. I therefore feel that it is absolutely necessary to open up the debate on both Argentina and Afghanistan as soon as possible, instead of postponing this subject until September.
If, at the end of the debate, we need to put a question to the Commission or the Council, all well and good: we will continue the debate in September or October with a question to the Council and the Commission.
I do not want to open up a debate on this, as that would be against the Rules. Mr van den Berg upholds the proposal of the Socialist Group. I therefore put to the vote that Item 4 "Democracy in Afghanistan" should be replaced by a new item, "The crisis in Argentina".
Mr President, on a point of order, we should be celebrating the International Criminal Court, which today comes into formal existence. Unfortunately, in the United Nations yesterday, the United States vetoed the United Nations mandate for Sfor in Bosnia, in which many EU countries are participating.
I should like to express my strongest possible objection to the operation of that veto in the Security Council, because it effectively vetoes, not only the mandate by the United Nations in relation to Sfor, but also the foreign policy of Ireland and other countries which operate in Sfor based on the UN mandate. Ireland may therefore have to withdraw from Sfor because a UN mandate will not now exist if this veto persists.
I would ask you to convey my objections at least, if not the objections of many others in this Parliament, to this operation by the United States. It is unbelievable that the United States is seeking to act outside international norms of law. It is unbelievable that it wants its personnel to be free from prosecution if they are involved in human rights breaches. It is not acceptable to this House and it should not be acceptable to the European Union.
We also have the possibility, Mr De Rossa, to discuss this on the agenda on Wednesday morning, following declarations by the Council and the Commission, but it is already clear, from the reaction in the House, what the overwhelming view is on this matter.
Mr President, on a point of order, in the early hours of last Thursday morning, a bus carrying 43 school children from Largs Academy in Ayrshire, Scotland, was involved in a tragic accident near the French village of Bierre-les-Semur, near Dijon in Burgundy. Sadly, a 15-year-old girl, Katherine Fish, was killed. One of the teachers accompanying the party lost an arm. Several pupils were seriously injured and are still undergoing treatment in hospital in Semur-en-Auxios and Dijon. Those who were less seriously injured have now been flown home to Scotland on a specially chartered plane.
I am sure that the other MEPs from Scotland would wish to join me in expressing our deep shock at this tragic accident and our great debt of gratitude to the Mayor of Bierre-les-Semur, Michel Neugnot, and to the emergency services, medical staff and residents of that area. They acted with enormous concern, sympathy and humanity in caring for these pupils and teachers in the aftermath of the accident and in supporting the many parents from Scotland who rushed to be with their children. The people of Scotland were deeply touched by the kindness and decency of these good people, many of whom volunteered to provide help and comfort to the crash victims.
I hope this House will join with me in thanking sincerely all those who opened their hearts to the courageous pupils who were involved in that accident. We wish those who were injured a speedy recovery and send our deepest sympathy to the parents and relatives of Katherine Fish.
Mr President, as I have already requested of you in writing, the Council must, as a matter of urgency, provide a full explanation of the serious events that involved hundreds of Portuguese citizens, including delegations of Portuguese political parties and members of parliament, who were trying to go to the demonstration due to take place on 22 June, in Seville, during the European Council and who were prevented from crossing the border between Portugal and Spain, with some of them even being subjected to violence by the Spanish police and having photographic and audiovisual equipment confiscated.
Since such occurrences constitute a flagrant breach of fundamental rights, freedoms and guarantees, not least the right to demonstrate and the right of assembly, it must be clarified who was responsible for these actions and what were the reasons for them so that such practices are not repeated in future. We must also clarify whether freedom of movement ,the right to demonstrate and the right of assembly are now going to be undermined whenever European summits are held. If this were the case, it would constitute a serious threat to democracy and an unacceptable restriction on the right to protest and to express one's indignation. The Portuguese parliament has already stated its position on this matter, because members of the national parliament were affected by this situation. I therefore ask you, Mr President, to obtain a full explanation from the Council about these serious events at the end of the Spanish Presidency.
Mr President, I rise in order to express my agreement with the comments by Mrs Figueiredo and to endorse her request to the Council and the Commission for explanations about the serious incidents that took place on the border between Portugal and Spain. We must condemn these incidents and draw the necessary conclusions from them. They have upset many people in Portugal and have caused a political storm, and this House cannot remain indifferent to what has occurred in a Member State of the European Union. The right to demonstrate and the freedom of movement are constituent rights of European citizenship and cannot be breached without powerful reasons for doing so and without this House stating its position and protesting.
The next item is the joint debate on the following three reports:
A5-0247/2002 by Mr Gran Frm on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the 2003 budget in view of the conciliation procedure before the Council's first reading [2002/2027(BUD)];
A5-0246/2002 by Mr Guido Podest on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the 2002 budget: implementation profile, transfers and supplementary and amending budgets;
A5-0248/2002 by Mr Guido Podest and Mrs Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on Draft Amending Budget No 3/2002 of the European Union for the 2002 financial year.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members and those in the public gallery, the European Parliament is aiming to ensure that the Budget for 2003 is a real reforming budget. There are two perspectives at the heart of this. One is naturally the historic matter of enlargement, and the other is the need to reform the European Union in various areas.
The bulk of the work on the Budget will, of course, take place in the autumn, but we hope to be able to solve a number of important issues at the conciliation in July in conjunction with the Council's first reading. The document we are debating and shall be voting on today is about providing the European Parliament's delegation with a special mandate ahead of this conciliation with the Danish Presidency and the Commission.
The interinstitutional agreement governing these conciliations highlights three areas that are to be given particular attention. These are agriculture, the fisheries agreements and the Common Foreign and Security Policy. I suspect that we will not get very far this year on the issues of agriculture and fisheries policy. With regard to agriculture, we are awaiting the Commission's draft mid-term review, and many practical details are still missing when it comes to the reform of fisheries policy. Naturally, we shall still be highlighting these issues.
With regard to agriculture, there are a number of practical requirements which we wish to address, for reform of agricultural policy ought to mean transferring resources from the traditional organisations of the market to rural development. We shall also be putting forward a number of demands concerning environmental perspectives, the prevention of new disasters involving animal diseases, etc. We hope it will be possible for some points to be considered as early as July.
With regard to fishing, we shall primarily be requesting all the information on the Council's plans for the future. We hope to be able to identify the appropriations necessary for us to be able to maintain fisheries agreements with a number of important nations. We naturally hope that this can take place without the drama seen last year when the whole agreement with Morocco collapsed, creating a difficult situation where all the work on the Budget was concerned. We remain conscious of the fact that we also have to keep the promise we made last year of a further EUR 27 million to support the changeover from fishing to other industries in Spain and Portugal.
I believe we shall be able to sort out some of the details pertaining to these issues, but we have also looked into a number of other main points. Let me start with the Common Foreign and Security Policy. We hope to be able to have a serious discussion on the appropriations required, particularly for the EU to be able to deploy a new police force in Bosnia to relieve the troops we have had there. We also hope to be able to bring about a preliminary discussion on a few other important points. We at least need a little more information on the Commission and the Council's intentions regarding the initiatives in Afghanistan and the Middle East. That is crucial if we are to be able to solve the Budget problems concerning external assistance.
In our view, there are too few resources. The fact that we have too few resources in category 4, i.e. external assistance, is a structural problem. We need some way of providing new resources. That could be done in accordance with the proposals which the Commission has put forward, but which we know the Council dislikes, concerning a special flexibility instrument for external assistance. The European Parliament has also put forward another alternative in this respect - a more active use of the emergency aid reserve. It would be excellent if we could find a solution to this issue in July.
Discussions on the issue of enlargement are likely to dominate in July. We mainly have to discuss the administrative resources needed to prepare the EU institutions for enlargement. I want to stress that we are committed to this. The timetable for enlargement must be adhered to. Therefore, preparations have to commence as soon as possible. It is vital to reach agreement on the administrative costs in category 5 in July's conciliation.
However, the fact that we are prioritising enlargement does not mean that we can just automatically add more money for staff and other administrative costs. We also have to be able to show that we can actively implement new priorities, particularly within the field of administration. In the EU, as in every modern administration, we must show that we are able to develop our methods of working, to reprioritise and to become more efficient and modern before we request more money. The Committee on Budgets has therefore decided to reject the use of the flexibility instrument in category 5. We believe that such use is contrary to the rules. It should not be assumed from the outset that we must use flexibility instruments.
We now know that the Commission is requesting funding for 500 new posts for the purpose of dealing with enlargement. I am convinced that these posts are necessary, but we must nevertheless ask a number of questions before we simply agree to such an increase. Over 800 people in the Commission are currently working on enlargement, of whom around 300 work for the Enlargement Directorate-General. Once the major round of enlargement is completed, it must be possible to redistribute these resources to work involving the enlarged EU. As such, we need more background information before we can just agree to automatically increasing the number of posts by 500.
The same applies to the RELEX reform. The Reform of the Management of External Assistance promised as early as 2000 that further reform would be carried out in 2002 along with a review. The Commission's annual policy statement has promised a further review of the RELEX Directorate-General's cooperation and efficiency. We wish to see results on these points before we agree to 500 new posts.
We are also launching two new projects -an expanded border region project with SME cooperation across the union and a project on simplifying the administration of the whole EU. This is an extraordinarily important project.
Ladies and gentlemen, today's report, which the Committee on Budgets decided to draw up at the beginning of the year, is intended to reinforce its power of monitoring the implementation of the European Union's budget. The Committee on Budgets intends this report to discharge Parliament's responsibility of establishing the Budget of the European Union, a responsibility conferred upon it by the Treaties, scrutinising the correspondence between the budget voted and its financial implementation. This is an essential part of respect for the political priorities laid down each year by Parliament in its financial document, a part which the Commission is sometimes wont to overlook.
The Committee on Budgets had two aims: to state the situation of the first semester, identifying initial signs of deviation from the budget voted, and to provide the Commission with guidelines for the second semester. The fact that there is no increase in the own resources ceiling during the current period of the financial perspective, 2000-2006, makes it even more essential that these objectives, which will enable us to improve the efficiency of our expenditure, are achieved.
With a view to this, Parliament's scrutiny has revealed two kinds of problem: the excessive and, at times, inappropriate use of the financial flexibility instruments and the poor implementation level for some headings. To give you an idea of the amounts we are talking about, during the current financial year alone, the Commission has already presented transfers of a total volume of EUR 250 million and, for example, more than EUR 2 billion in payment appropriations were transferred during the 2001 budgetary procedure. To improve this situation, the Commission is going to present an implementation schedule as of this year.
This new instrument, called for by Parliament and the Council together, will allow more accurate monitoring of the situation, although there will still be room for improvement. Indeed, we feel that the Commission should present the plan at the same time as it presents the request to the Budget Authority and should, moreover, present the information as far as possible on a case-by-case basis. To sum up, to establish a closer, more systematic link with the appropriations originally voted, assessment of requests should take into account the voted budget, the current implementation, the implementation profiles presented by the Commission, a timetable for the implementation of the remaining amount on the 'donor line' and the investigations carried out by our parliamentary committees. If this information is not deemed to be satisfactory, the transfer request will be rejected. As a general rule, transfer requests which would reduce the budget lines voted by Parliament will not, therefore, be accepted.
On the other hand, the supplementary and amending budgets pose a different kind of problem and allow us to deal with unforeseen situations and make the necessary adjustments to the budget when the accounts from the previous financial year have been closed. It was thanks to SAB 1 that a solution was found to finance the Convention. SAB 2, and SAB 3 as well - which will be dealt with today - have, in actual fact, returned to the Member States a total amount of almost EUR 14 billion of payment appropriations which were not spent in the previous year.
In order to improve the track record and image of the European Union, we would like, with this report, to call upon the Commission to present a plan of how the payments cancelled in the 2001 budget can be rescheduled, to present before 30 September a proper assessment of payments in 2002 and to accelerate payments on old commitments or to decommit those and cancel the obsolete payment appropriations. As things stand, for the end of the year, the Commission is forecasting an implementation rate of 100% for commitments and 97% for payments. This was only 72% in 2001 and, if these results are achieved, we will have made real progress.
As regards the next SABs, certainly the reconstruction in Afghanistan and, in all probability, the situation in the Middle East could require additional resources. As regards reconstruction in Afghanistan, additional appropriations may only be used if the Commission is able to demonstrate that the appropriations already entered under the budget lines have been spent properly, taking into account the commitments given by the other donors too.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you can see, this is a somewhat technical report, but it does show how necessary it is for all our parliamentary committees to concentrate on monitoring the Executive. I would like to say that, thanks to the excellent cooperation of all the shadow rapporteurs for the budget of the different committees, Mr Frm and I have in recent months created a number of monitoring groups for the various policies. If the situation improves, it will be due not least to the work of the shadow rapporteurs for the budget, which is not always obvious. Thus, in the future, the parliamentary committees will be able to make Parliament's democratic control over the Commission even more effective.
I would point out that, on 15 June, outstanding commitments totalled over EUR 111 billion, which is more than the European Union's annual budget. Even if this figure is a reflection of the natural distribution of payments over time, a constant effort is still needed from the Commission to reduce the burden of the past. Cancelling EUR 97 million of old appropriations would be an - albeit tentative - step in the right direction.
Lastly, I would like to point out that, although our cooperation with the Commission has certainly been fruitful in recent months, it may well be that we need to work together more closely to ensure that the final product is more in line with what the Budget Authority voted at the beginning of the year.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the amendment to the 2002 Budget also contains a number of administrative expenses, which I will disregard.
The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed. Are there any comments?
Mr President, yesterday, when Mr Cappato asked for information on whether a motion for a resolution signed by 10% of the Members of Parliament was going to be included in the agenda of the Conference of Presidents, Vice?President Schmid announced that a response would be given that afternoon. I would remind you that I started to refuse liquids as of 5 p.m. yesterday evening, having been on a hunger strike for 24 hours already, for precisely this reason: the motion for a resolution in question has already been withheld once from debate by the political body. I now hope that you will find the time to restore the dignity of the political body and allow it to do its job.
Mr Turco, I will consult the Conference of Presidents at its meeting on Thursday on this question.
Mr President, I would like to point out a linguistic problem concerning Amendment No 11 to my report, which was put to the vote yesterday. Out of respect for grammar and the institutions, the amendment should read as follows: 'The financial framework for the implementation of this Regulation for the period 2000 to 2006 shall be EUR 4700 million and shall be subject to a mid-term review based on the implementation of this Regulation?. The rest of the amendment remains as before.
I understand that matter is already being taken care of by the services.
Mr President, a delegation from the democratically elected parliament of Taiwan visited us here in Strasbourg yesterday at the invitation of Members of the European Parliament. You, Mr President, did this delegation the honour of welcoming them and speaking with them.
However, during this visit something happened of which I, and I believe several colleagues here, are ashamed. Last night our guests had to leave in haste because the visa that they had been granted by the French authorities was only valid for 24 hours. All attempts by Members of this House to have this visa extended or to have a visa issued for a longer period failed in the face of the obstinacy of the French authorities.
I have two questions for you, Mr President. Firstly, do you consider this refusal to grant a visa for - and this is my suspicion - purely political reasons to be compatible with the values of the European Union, which deems freedom, including the freedom of movement of all people, to be a fundamental right? Secondly, do you, like me and other members of this House, consider this incident to constitute a serious obstacle to the proper functioning of the European Parliament in Strasbourg? If so, what action are you minded to take?
This is not the first time that senior politicians from that state have suffered the problem of a refusal of visa and this is not the only place of work of the European Parliament where that problem has presented itself. I am bound to say that I look at the part of the bottle that is half full, which is to say that at least yesterday the authorities allowed the visit, brief as it may have been, something which for some of the members of the delegation had not been possible on previous occasions.
So yesterday marks a modest progress towards reconciling the rights of this Parliament to do its business and to be able to ensure that those who are invited to Parliament or its committees can make those visits.
Mr President, I should like to raise an issue relating to the fittings in the Parliament building, something that is also frequently brought to my attention by visiting groups. We in this Parliament are rightly very proud of the fact that we may all speak, listen to and read our mother tongue. However, many of my visitors ask: why then are all of the signs, notices and also all of the announcements on screens here in Parliament only in one language? To my mind this is surely about our identity, about whether we all feel at home here, and it is also about Parliament's image. After all, at the moment eleven languages are spoken here and I think that it must be possible, technically speaking, to ensure that the fittings here in Parliament reflect this. 90% of my visitors do not speak French and when they look, for example, at the evacuation instructions, which are displayed on every 'totem pole' or whatever it is called here, they find that they are only in French. The instructions to be followed in an emergency are only in one language. I do not actually believe that this is appropriate in the European Parliament. I would therefore ask you to instruct our services to put forward proposals for how we can extend the multilingualism in this Parliament, of which we are rightly proud, to signs and notices.
That is a useful suggestion. We should refer it, in the first instance, to the College of Quaestors and if we can find an appropriate way of doing that, it would be a good idea.
Mr President, I would like to emphasise what Mr Sakellariou said regarding the Speaker of the Taiwanese Parliament and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Common Security and Defence Policy. Mr President, I urge you to take up with the French authorities the fact that Parliament here in Strasbourg should be able to work on the same terms as in Brussels. If the Speaker of the democratically elected Taiwanese Parliament and the Committee on Foreign Affairs had visited Brussels and not Strasbourg, the delegation would have been allowed to stay for longer than 24 hours and would not have been forced to break off under the dishonourable circumstances which prevailed yesterday.
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the programme of the Danish presidency.
By way of introducing this item, I should like to thank on behalf of Parliament and the presidents of the groups, the Danish presidency for inviting us to Copenhagen in advance of the formal start for an extensive discussion with the incoming presidency on its priorities. I note that the President-in-Office of the Council, Prime Minister Rasmussen will exceptionally participate in our major debate next November on enlargement, even though he will not be reporting on the work of the European Council. We anticipate before the close of the presidency at the Copenhagen Summit an intensive dialogue with the group leaders from Parliament.
These are all innovative aspects showing a commitment to partnership between the institutions. I should like, on behalf of Parliament, to express formally to the President-in-Office our appreciation of the extent and intensity of these efforts and of this innovation.
Mr President, honourable Members, honourable Members of the European Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is a very great honour for me to speak in this Parliament for the first time here today. It is with particular pleasure that I do so as President-in-Office of the European Council with a view to presenting the priorities of the Danish Presidency of the EU. I look forward to the subsequent debate concerning the tasks ahead of us.
The European Parliament is an important and constructive force in the development of European cooperation and I am sure that this will continue to be true in the months ahead, in which we face a number of decisions of crucial importance for the future of the EU. The Danish Presidency is therefore preparing for close cooperation with the European Parliament.
The Danish Presidency wishes to strengthen the cooperation between the institutions of the EU. I know that the European Parliament shares this desire. We will seek to promote contacts and cooperation between the institutions. We intend to hold summits between Parliament, the Commission and the Presidency ahead of the European Council meetings in Brussels and Copenhagen.
We face important decisions in connection with our common decision making. The Presidency will demonstrate efficiency and flexibility and looks forward to fruitful cooperation. We have a new budget to pass. Here, too, the Presidency is ready for constructive and results-oriented negotiations.
The next item is the report (A5-0197/2002) by Mrs Figueiredo, on behalf of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the application of the gender equality work programme (2001-2005) [2001/2266(INI)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, despite the positive steps taken in the legislative area to promote equality between men and women, many shortcomings, inequalities and forms of discrimination still remain in the differing practices of the States Members, which must be resolved.
Following the adoption in 2000 of the Community framework strategy for equality between men and women and of the respective Community action programme for 2001 to 2005, there has been an effort to involve all Community policies and all Commission departments in this strategy, which has already produced some positive practical results. We need to go further, however. It is unacceptable, for example, that the Community institutions themselves, including the European Convention now running, comprise less than 20% women, in other words, an even lower percentage than that of the previous Convention drafting the Charter on Fundamental Rights.
It is particularly important that the implementation of the guidelines, directives, recommendations and resolutions aimed at the promotion of equality by the various Member States be monitored decisively in order to ensure that the decisions taken in the sphere of policy on equality of rights and opportunities are better implemented and that they are also effectively applied in national equal rights and opportunities policy.
For example, therefore, with regard to the objective set at the Lisbon Council of ensuring that 60% of women are part of the active population by 2010, it is reaffirmed that this target will only contribute to equality of opportunities for men and women if the majority have quality and properly paid jobs, stressing the importance of various forms and methods of training, and the establishment of a sufficient number of facilities for the care of children and dependent persons and by promoting diversification of the career choices open to girls.
Hence also the importance of the implementation of the Council recommendation of 31 March 1992. It is not enough for the Commission to say that it adopted the report on this implementation on 4 February 1998. Four years have now passed and we need to know the current state of play, focusing on the importance of establishing common indicators as regards childcare structures and the disparity in wages and other forms of income between men and women, by sector, with regard inter alia to atypical forms of work and part-time work.
It is equally important to insist on the conclusion of research on the causes and means adopted and to be adopted by the various Member States in order to combat the disparity in wages which still exists (of around 15% to 20%), despite the 1975 directive on equal treatment as regards pay. Precise quantitative and temporal objectives must also be included in the employment guidelines, which are already in the process of being revised, and the Commission must submit a report on the matter, specifically on the measures to be adopted.
There is also an urgent need to establish goals to be achieved in realistic and measurable stages in the fields of intervention envisaged in the Community framework strategy on gender equality, in order to ensure real practical progress in all areas, bearing in mind that there are still many infringements of legislation on equal treatment between men and women. With regard to the new directive being prepared on gender equality in sectors other than employment opportunities and which the Commission promised to submit before June, this must not be subject to any further delay. We must also insist on making improvements in line with other existing directives, specifically those concerning the safety and health at work of women who are pregnant, or have recently given birth or are breastfeeding and the equal treatment of men and women in legal and professional social security schemes.
The central issue is the need to work for the integration of the prospect of equality between men and women in economic guidelines, not least in the accession process, with a view to preventing any adverse effects on gender equality of the processes of privatisation, liberalisation and cuts in public expenditure in the social sectors, and we must reaffirm that quality public services are essential, and call for an increase in the budget allocation in the social sphere in order to prevent social exclusion and to combat trafficking in women.
Lastly, I wish to thank everyone who worked on drafting this report, and I am convinced that the success of the fight for equal opportunities for men and women, not least in political life and in decision-making bodies, depends also on the greater involvement and political will of us all, both men and women.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to thank Mrs Figueiredo for her work on the application of the gender equality work programme, since, as she has said and as we say continually in the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, we still need to carry on working to achieve equality in most fields, such as equal pay and equal opportunities, despite the fact that this Chamber constantly receives reports of all types covering a wide range of legislation. We need to continue with this work and to insist that the programme is complied with; we must be familiar with the data and possess better information on the implementation of the programme. It would be very helpful to our work if the data were given for each country. That is something we have asked for many times and which is crucial if the work is to be based on real data and if it is to be more effective.
As the report states, it is also important to achieve the objectives proposed at the Lisbon European Council, for women to represent 60% of the active population, not forgetting the significant number of women who work in small family-owned businesses, with no recognition of any kind for their work and with no social protection. That is a problem we should address in the near future, as the number of women in this situation in areas such as agriculture, fishing and small companies is highly significant. These are specific gender-related problems which arise in various fields, but which are extremely important. This report calls for a solution to be found.
Gender is also very important in terms of social exclusion and poverty. We should therefore welcome the fact that the Danish Presidency has included this in its programme in order to be able to make progress in solving these problems.
I also genuinely hope that the proposal for a directive on equality based on Article 13 of the Treaty will be presented here. I also hope that the establishment of the Institute for Equality between men and women, which I am pleased to see the feasibility report has already approved, will not be postponed.
Commissioner, on behalf of my Group I insist that this work must continue as quickly as possible.
The work programme 'Equal Opportunities' for the year 2002 is an excellent document. It effectively outlines the actions taken by the Commission and the strategy adopted. During a meeting of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities of this Parliament in April, Commissioner Diamantopoulou explained this strategy once again in the penetrating and convincing manner that is so characteristic of her. We very much appreciated the dialogue that was initiated at the time. I should particularly like to mention the initiative to develop policy within the gender dimension of foreign policy. The Commissioner might be able to inform us of the latest on this score.
On a more general note, it should be mentioned in my view that the European Commission is currently ahead in the way it tackles gender mainstreaming. Many a Member State, but also the European Parliament, could take a leaf out of its book.
I should like to single out a number of elements from the report by Mrs Figueiredo that is before us.
First of all, I should like to turn my attention to paragraph 3 of her report, the issue of the so-called 'Gender Institute', which is, by the way, a strange term on which we should be able to improve.
We learnt about the feasibility study on the subject of an Institute which collates and disseminates information, supports networks, and so on. In short, it fulfils a broker role, and the implication is that it could be useful to give women's issues a more political dimension in Europe and to support the professional content of our work. My question to the Commission is whether it shares this idea and would like to develop this further. Above all, would it like to ask Parliament for advice on this and if so, what is the timeframe it envisages? I am of the opinion that there are many people in the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities who are keen on the idea of an Institute, but would first like to see more concrete plans on the table before they can give their final verdict. My question is therefore: will the Commission produce such a plan?
My second question pertains to paragraph 5. Can the Commission give assurances that it will draft a political analysis of the state of implementation by the Member States of the equal treatment acquis and of its intentions to amend this legislation, if necessary, or to start treaty inbox procedures?
Finally, I should like to echo the request already made by Mrs Avils Perea, and ask when the Commission will now finally produce its draft directive on equal treatment for which we have been waiting an awfully long time?
Mr President, I should like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for carrying out such tireless work in this area. The outcome is not of course dependent upon the Commissioner for Equality alone. It is dependent to the very highest degree upon the whole of the Commission, and I am completely convinced that, in our present Commissioner, we have an extremely good spokesperson for equality. It is not so easy to get a programme such as this accepted, and the reason for that is clear enough, there being only five female Commissioners out of a total of twenty. We are all aware, then, that we are under the critical threshold for getting things through, so there is cause for thanking the Commissioner for being so indefatigable. If we are to criticise anyone, it is in any case not our Commissioner. Rather, it is the men in the Commission to whom we should be addressing our attention.
Having said that, I should also like to thank the rapporteur for the brilliant report she has presented here. I think, in general, that it is one of our very major tasks to continue to keep these issues on the agenda. The EU is a political project which therefore applies to both men and women. For that reason, it is important that we always be careful to involve the other half of the population, namely women. That being said, we must of course also distinguish between matters to which the principle of subsidiarity should apply and those which are matters of overarching concern. In common with previous rapporteurs, I would also enquire after the Equality Institute. It is becoming ever more obvious that we shall have a shortage of data if there is a lack of people, for example in the EU, who are able to collect, and so coordinate, national data. Then, there is the issue of subsidiarity, which is also mentioned in the report in connection with important areas, such as childcare arrangements, in which efforts need to be made. Without such efforts, women will not be able to enter the labour market. This is an area to which I still regard the principle of subsidiarity as applying. It is an area in which we can merely point to best practice and, in reality, only issue exhortations about rather than enter directly into.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 4 July 2002.
I should like to take the opportunity to welcome everyone back for the autumn session of our work. I am sure that you are now relaxed and ready to do battle on the various public policy issues ahead of us.
In recent weeks in Central Europe, particularly in upper and lower Austria, eastern Germany and parts of the Czech Republic, entire areas have been ravaged by floods of unprecedented and catastrophic proportions. More than 100 people have lost their lives and tens of thousands have been forced out of their homes and out of their work places. Today, on behalf of myself and this House I want to express our deepest sympathy with the victims of the floods and their families, and to recognise the extraordinary efforts of the rescue services and so many volunteers. Tomorrow, in a specially convened emergency debate, in addition to our heartfelt sympathy of this afternoon we have the possibility, in a practical way, to lay the foundations to show real solidarity. As a mark of respect for those who died, I ask you to rise in a minute's silence.
On Sunday, 4 August, Cecilio Gallego Alaria and a six-year-old girl were killed by a car bomb which had been placed near a bus stop in the Spanish town of Santa Pola in Alicante. On 1 August David Caldwell was killed in an explosion in Derry in Northern Ireland. By these acts, terrorists have shown once more in their denial to the right to life their essential provocation to the democratic order. Terrorism denies the common values and principles that the European Union is founded upon, represents, promotes and defends. Our Union is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law which are common to the Member States and therefore can offer no justification for the use of terrorist violence.
On my own behalf and that of the House, I strongly condemn these acts of terrorism and express my deepest condolences to the victims' families, and our deepest sympathy for those affected by terrorist attacks. On behalf of the House I express once more our support for the respective authorities in their efforts in the fight against terrorism. I ask you to observe one minute's silence for the victims of terrorism.
The final draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 28 August 2002 has been distributed. The following change has been proposed:
I have received a proposal from the Verts/ALE Group to add to the agenda of Wednesday, 4 September a special debate on the International Criminal Court.
Mr President, I believe that the Criminal Court has the support of almost all the Parliamentary groups. However, none of the governments - whether right or left-wing - really support the Criminal Court, and it is my view that we need to hold a debate during this part-session which will allow us to make it clear that we reject any proposal to grant immunity to anybody outside this Court. Such a debate would give us the opportunity to adopt a resolution during the second September part-session.
In view of the fact that a meeting of Foreign Affairs Ministers is due to take place on 30 September to decide whether or not to allow exceptions, I feel that two debates will be more effective than one if we want to make it quite clear to all the governments that the European Parliament does not wish there to be any exceptions whatsoever.
That is why neither I nor my group feel that a single closed debate on a motion - on 24 September next - will be sufficient. We recommend that a debate be opened so that the European public is informed of the firm position of all the Parliamentary groups. We therefore call for another debate to be included in the programme for this part-session.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we do not disagree on the matter in hand, but we do urge that we go about it in another way. On Wednesday, we will be having a truly wide-ranging and very serious debate on Iraq and other important issues, and our group has made very careful preparation for this not only as regards speaking time but also as regards what is to be said. We therefore propose that it is not this week that we should have the debate on the International Criminal Court, but during the second September part-session. That would in any case still precede 30 September and the Council meeting, so we can have a prior debate concluded by a resolution. There is, then, no disagreement about this, but, when it comes to procedure, we favour the second September part-session here in Strasbourg rather than this week.
Mr President, I believe we are all in favour of the International Criminal Court. There are no disagreements about this. We are dealing with an issue of procedure and my Group is in favour of a debate with a resolution in the second September part-session. But if you will allow me, Mr President, I am going to make a proposal which I believe will interest Mr Cohn-Bendit and many other members of the House. I would also point out that my Group expressed its disagreement with dealing with a question on Mercosur during this sitting.
My proposal is as follows: the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy should include this issue in its next meeting, with an express request to the Commission to communicate the opinion, which appears to exist, on the possible consequences for a Member State of altering its position in relation to a common position adopted, since there is a common position on this point, and, apparently, that represents a violation of the Treaties. The issue is very important and I would ask - I cannot see Mr Brok, but I imagine this will be communicated to him - that the Foreign Affairs Committee consider it. In a common position, we have all - the Member States and Parliament - given our word. This should be looked into and, if it is a violation of the Treaties, Parliament would be in a much stronger position to condemn any possible unilateral change of position on such an important issue.
Mr President, Mr Cohn-Bendit raises a very important point because this is an issue on which decisions may well be made before our September II part-session. We know that Member States are under great pressure at present and the matter needs to be dealt with. At the same time, it was the view of the Conference of Presidents last week - and I believe it would be the view of this House - that we need to have a full debate on the current situation regarding a possible armed attack on Iraq.
I would ask you, Mr President, either to take up Mr Barn Crespo's suggestion or to try to find a way of scheduling such a debate on the International Criminal Court this week without eating into the time foreseen for the debate on Iraq.
Mr President, this decision leads me, as a member of the delegation to Romania, to make a request of you. In mid-September, the Romanian parliament will be discussing the agreement which their foreign minister has negotiated with the USA in this matter, without - as you will perhaps be aware - keeping them informed about it. The debate in Bucharest will therefore be a very lively one. If we are to discuss this only at the second September part-session, you should perhaps write to your opposite number to the effect that the Romanian parliament should hold fast to the EU common position and perhaps decline to support this agreement. That is what would be called for in that situation. Thank you very much.
I would be very pleased to do so on behalf of Parliament.
Mr President, it is also with regard to the agenda. As it stands in front of us, it does not contain an item which, under our new Rules, namely Rule 121a, should automatically be placed on the agenda for Mondays: a 30-minute period of one-minute speeches for Members to raise items of political interest. That should have been on our draft agenda and it appears to have been left out - no doubt an oversight, these are new rules, not everyone is used to them yet - but it should automatically be on the agenda at some point during the Monday.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would remind the House that Rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure has been amended. As of today, the Minutes will be approved when the sitting is resumed in the afternoon, at 3 p.m.. They will be distributed in the Chamber to all the Members at 2.30 p.m. but they will be available from the distribution service from 2 p.m. onwards.
Mr President, you have already answered one part of my question, but I wanted first to say that I do not know whether I signed myself in yesterday, although I was here all day and actually voted. So I would like to ask that that be added, in view of the Minutes arriving so late anyway.
The second point I wanted to raise is whether it might be possible in future for the Minutes to be distributed in the morning? This would mean that deferring the approval to the afternoon would have the advantage that we could peruse the Minutes at our leisure in the morning. I really do not see why their distribution has to wait until the afternoon.
Mr Posselt, I would suggest that you make your statement about your attendance in the House yesterday again this afternoon, so as to be sure that it reaches the ears of the services. In any case, you took part in the vote so you do not have to worry.
The next item is the joint debate on three reports tabled on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism:
(A5-0258/2002) by Mr Fava, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down the framework for the creation of the Single European Sky [COM(2001) 123 - C5-0480/2001 - 2001/0060(COD)];
(A5-0266/2002) by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on:
1. the provision of Air Navigation Services in the Single European Sky [COM(2001) 564 - C5-0482/2001 - 2001/0235(COD)]
2. on the organisation and use of the airspace in the Single European Sky [COM(2001) 564 - C5-0483/2001 - 2001/0236(COD)]
3. on the interoperability of the European Air Traffic Management network [COM(2001) 564 - C5-0484/2001 - 2001/0237(COD)]; - (A5-265/2002) by Mrs Maes, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the safety of third countries aircraft using Community airports [COM(2002) 8 - C5-0023/2002 - 2002/0014(COD)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today we are going to deal with a legislative package aimed at establishing the Single European Sky. The main objective of all these measures is simply to respond to the problem of congestion in European airspace without reducing its safety, but rather increasing it.
Once again we must remember that that is our main concern and priority, above all following the tragic accident of berlingen - where regrettably a number of people were killed - and which left us with the feeling that it should have, and could have, been prevented.
Our intention is to introduce a harmonised regulatory framework which governs the management of air traffic in the European Union, thereby facilitating better management of the airspace and improving safety.
I would point out that the Single Sky was one of the initiatives that President Prodi announced during his investiture debate as a political priority for a Europe which is close to the citizens. Over these three years we have been working on this issue, and today is the day to achieve concrete results.
Turning now to the actual reports, I am firstly going to mention those by the rapporteurs, Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte, which recognise the strategic importance and maturity of the initiative on the Single Sky. I would like to express my satisfaction with the support the competent committee has lent by studying these proposals here in Parliament and, once again, I would like to thank the European Parliament for its cooperation and work.
With regard more specifically to the amendments, the Commission is able to accept the majority of them; some with changes of wording better suited to the text and others partially, since these amendments generally clarify and strengthen our initial proposals. However, the Commission cannot accept and must therefore reject Amendments Nos 1, 2, 13, 19, 24, 27, 29, 34, 35 and 37 to 40 of Mr Fava's report, and Amendments Nos 3, 12, 13, 14, 26, 46, 50, 51, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66, 75, 77 to 80 and 83 to 107 of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte.
If you will allow me, I would like to make some observations on the amendments of most importance. Firstly, I am thinking above all of those which relate to relations with Eurocontrol. I agree that it is necessary to establish good cooperation between the Community and this organisation and, in fact, the technical negotiations for the Community's membership of Eurocontrol have already been completed. As the honourable Members know very well, the signing of the official agreement on the protocol for the Community's joining Eurocontrol is scheduled for one month's time, simply as a result of a problem with parliamentary agreement in one of the countries of the Union.
It is not therefore necessary to specify in the Regulation the methods for technical assistance for this organisation, since we are going to be part of it. I believe that the amendments proposed in this regard relate to aspects which are already adequately covered as a result of the Community's membership of Eurocontrol, otherwise they will have to be modified in order to bring them into line with the nature of the Community acts. The same is true of the amendments which request obligatory consultations. The Commission does not question the principle of consultation with business and social operators, but it wants this principle to be applied while respecting its right to initiative.
With regard to the nature of the air traffic services, the legislative package has been carefully worded to reconcile the demands of public interest with the need to support the dynamic of the sector. While recognising the inherent characteristics of these services, we cannot ignore their economic impact on the direct and indirect costs they imply. Therefore the Commission cannot accept, and rejects, Amendments Nos 12 and 13 of Mr Fava's report. This is also the case with a series of amendments which I mentioned earlier, which we believe to be legally or technically incomplete and which we cannot therefore support, as well as those amendments which call for the rejection of our proposal in its entirety.
I would also like to add the following considerations on certain amendments in the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte. Amendment No 13, on the principle of the separation of the national monitoring authorities from the air navigation service providers affects the reasonable compromise found at the time of the negotiations within the High-level Group, where - I would remind Members - all the countries of the Union, as well as Norway and Switzerland, were represented.
I share the view that the cooperation between the civil and military sectors is a key factor for the success of the Single European Sky and, in fact, our legislative proposals are intended to create the conditions necessary to stimulate that cooperation. But Amendments Nos 57 and 59 go further than we are allowed under the current distribution of competences and therefore the first pillar. Amendments Nos 14 and 51 introduce appeal mechanisms which are already provided for within national procedures.
With regard to the report by Mrs Maes, on the safety of third-country aircraft, this proposal is intended to improve air safety through the creation of an inspection system for third-country aircraft aimed at verifying their conformity with international safety standards. The Commission had presented a proposal on this issue in 1997, which had not been able to be approved until today because of the argument over the Gibraltar airport. The proposal now presented to Parliament includes the provisions of the common position which the Council had approved previously, as well as the amendments approved by the European Parliament at second reading. The rapporteur, Mrs Maes, whom I would like to thank, has agreed to this new proposal and the Commission is satisfied with the report adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
In fact, we are in a position to accept the majority of the 23 amendments; five of them, with regard to their principles, with a different wording, and some others also with certain textual changes.
Nevertheless, there are seven amendments which the Commission sees as problematic and I would therefore like to make the following observations: firstly, the list of shortcomings which appears in Amendment No 3 is restrictive in relation to the data available to the Commission; secondly, Amendment No 6 is not acceptable either, since the proposal for a Directive relates solely to third-country aircraft and not to aircraft of Member States of the Union. The same can be said of Amendment No 8, which would allocate new responsibilities to the European Air Safety Agency and this would require amending the Regulation establishing it, and of Amendment No 10, which is outside the scope of the proposed Directive. Amendment No 14 does not seem to us to be necessary, since the Commission's proposal specifies that all complaints are admissible, and Amendment No 15 would give the aircraft inspection authorities considerable additional work and anyway the practical usefulness of the supplementary information requested seems to us be doubtful to say the least. Finally, Amendment No 17 is outside the scope of the inspections covered by the Directive and would contradict the principles of the Chicago Convention, and we must therefore reject it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I hope I have clarified the Commission's position with regard to the various reports which are the subject of this joint debate. Nobody doubts that the reports which Parliament will approve tomorrow will contribute significantly to the safety, efficiency and punctuality of air traffic in Europe.
The first item is the Council and Commission statements on Iraq followed by a debate.
Mr President, I should like to say thank you for this opportunity to discuss this particularly topical subject. The debate occurs at a time when growing international attention is being paid to Iraq, and the situation is one about which practically all the media are speculating on a daily basis, this morning too, as we have no doubt all seen.
It is important to emphasise that the EU and the countries of Europe do not have any quarrel with the Iraqi people. Historically, Iraq has contributed to the region in many ways, and the Iraqi refugees who at present live in Europe mostly make positive contributions to the countries in which they live.
In 1990, the Iraqi regime chose, however, to invade the small defenceless neighbouring country of Kuwait. A broad coalition of countries from all around the world stood shoulder to shoulder in repelling this aggression.
After the international community, headed by the United States, had liberated Kuwait, Iraq agreed to a ceasefire involving a list of conditions aimed at ending the war over Kuwait. Iraq agreed, among other things, to give up all its weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles. As soon as the UN is able to confirm that Iraq has complied with its obligations to destroy existing stocks of weapons of mass destruction and to stop developing new weapons of this kind, it will be possible to lift the sanctions.
Unfortunately, the Iraqi regime has chosen over the last 12 years not to cooperate fully in phasing out the country's weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles.
In 1991, the UN Security Council set up its first commission of inquiry, UNSCOM (United Nations Special Commission), which was offered completely unacceptable working conditions by the Iraqi regime, culminating in the regime's refusal, in 1998, to give UNSCOM further access to Iraqi territory. Through Resolution 1284 of December 1999, the Security Council set up a new supervisory committee, UNMOVIC (United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Committee) to replace UNSCOM. UNMOVIC too, however, was refused permission by the Iraqi authorities to enter Iraq under conditions that would enable it to carry out its tasks.
In recent years, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan has made a sustained effort to convince the Iraqi regime to allow the weapons inspectors to fulfil their task so that Iraq is able to comply with the ceasefire conditions laid down more than ten years ago. So far, these efforts have been fruitless. Iraq continues to make new demands and to lay down further conditions and it still refuses to give the weapons inspectors free and unconditional access.
The economic and social situation in Iraq has become worse and worse since the Gulf War. Infant mortality in central and southern Iraq is at present twice as high as in the period before the Gulf War. Malnutrition is generally more severe. The school system suffers from a lack of materials, and the infrastructure and water and sewage systems are in urgent need of renovation and development. Iraq has gone from being a relatively wealthy country enjoying economic growth to being a country with a shrinking economy and a humanitarian situation of critical proportions. The suffering particularly affects the weakest groups - women, children and the poor - together with those groups that do not support Saddam Hussein's regime.
Very significant humanitarian aid is therefore being provided to Iraq. The EU's emergency aid programme, ECHO, is the biggest single donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq, but the UN system, the International Red Cross and associated donors are also active in the humanitarian sphere.
To counteract the consequences of the sanctions for the civilian population, the Oil for Food' programme has been set up, allowing Iraq to supplement its own production of food and medicine with imports funded from the country's oil income. The Security Council proposed the 'Oil for Food' programme as long ago as 1991 but, because of reluctance and delay on the part of Iraq, the programme was not implemented until December 1996. The UN revised the 'Oil for Food' programme by means of Security Council Resolution 1409 of 14 May 2002. Income from the 'Oil for Food' programme is to be used for food and for medicine and other health sector resources, as well as for materials and supplies for civilian purposes in Iraq, including equipment for maintaining the oil sector. Under the revised 'Oil for Food' programme, most goods can be exported to Iraq without any problem, at the same time as there being tighter controls on goods that may be used for producing weapons, including weapons of mass destruction.
The UN Security Council is dealing with the international community's position on the Iraq issue. The UN Secretary-General has been in contact with Iraq's Foreign Minister on a number of occasions this year in efforts to end the present deadlock. The latest contact took place yesterday. These efforts have not yet produced practical results, however.
The EU's position is clear and was most recently expressed in a declaration by the Presidency on behalf of the EU on 20 May 2002, stating that:
'The European Union welcomes the meetings between the Iraqi foreign minister and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, aimed at finding a diplomatic solution to the question of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, through full implementation of the Security Council Resolutions and compliance by Iraq with its disarmament obligations.
The European Union reaffirms its attachment to the unconditional observance of the United Nations Security Council Resolutions. It calls on Iraq to comply with the Resolutions without delay, in particular by agreeing to the return of inspectors to Iraq in accordance with Resolution 1284.
The European Union unreservedly supports all efforts on the part of the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The European Union welcomes the Security Council's adoption of Resolution 1409 of 14 May 2002 which significantly eases the United Nations sanctions on Iraq. The new 'Oil for Food' programme will allow Iraq to import civilian goods more freely, while maintaining strict control on dual use goods. Such control remains necessary owing to the continuing concern of the international community regarding the potential use of these goods in mass-destruction or conventional weapons programmes. The European Union calls upon Iraq to cooperate fully with this new sanctions regime, which should help improve the humanitarian situation and above all benefit the Iraqi people.'
There has been much speculation in the international press during the summer about a possible and imminent American attack on Iraq. The American President has said that the United States wants to see a change of regime in Iraq. That is something quite specific. The President has also said that it will consult its European allies and partners. That is something we are convinced will happen, if the occasion should arise.
Mr President, I do not simply want to repeat or parrot what the Minister has just said in his comprehensive speech about what has led up to the present situation. So I will discard some of my remarks that would otherwise have been rather repetitive, which should allow even more honourable Members to take part in this exceptionally important and, I think in terms of procedure, almost unique debate.
Over the past few weeks Iraq has figured more and more prominently, as the Minister just said, on the international agenda. The situation appears to be evolving day by day. What is plain, whatever else may be doubtful, is that the risk of a very grave new crisis is increasing. Many important voices have been raised, not least in Washington, about how to deal with Iraq and with the problems linked to its possession and development of weapons of mass destruction. Positions have been expressed by many key players, including European governments. I note from this morning's papers what was said only yesterday.
Against the background of this tumult of speeches and articles, I would like today simply to concentrate on the things we know with certainty and on which we should all be able to agree.
First, as pointed out by Baroness Nicholson's excellent overview of the present situation in Iraq, which we discussed in this Chamber last May - and I agree, incidentally, with everything the Minister said about our concern for the people of Iraq - we can have no doubt about the evil nature of the regime led by Saddam Hussein. That was made manifest in the excellent report that we discussed in May, albeit, I have to say, with slightly fewer people in attendance than is the case this morning. Terrible events have occurred throughout the 23 years of his rule: wars, aggression and brutal internal repression, including the use of chemical weapons against his own people. There is, in his country, a total absence of basic human and civil rights and I have no doubt that the Iraqi people would be better served by new and different leadership. Indeed, I would be surprised if anybody thought that they are best served by this leadership, not just the Iraqi people, but the Middle East region and indeed the whole world. His is not the only regime that the world would be better off without - there are a lot of others as well - but it is certainly as high on the list as any.
Secondly, following the departure of UN inspectors in 1998, a UN Security Council Resolution, No 1284, which the minister referred to, was adopted in December 1999, establishing a new arms inspection entity, UNMOVIC, and setting out what Iraq has to do to have UN sanctions lifted. Notably, it had to cooperate with the inspectors 'in all respects'. This means that Iraq should give full unrestricted access to UNMOVIC inspectors to any site, area, equipment and installation at any moment without any conditions.
Yet Iraq never complied with this Security Council Resolution - just as it failed to cooperate with the UN throughout the 1990s - there were nine Security Council Resolutions - either refusing entry to UN inspectors, or imposing unacceptable conditions on their operations. This House has always been absolutely clear about the importance of the UN in securing better global governance of our troubled planet and I do not think that you can exempt Iraq from those considerations.
According to the UNSCOM report of January 1999, there are legitimate suspicions that the Iraqi regime is developing weapons of mass destruction. It is not the Commissioner for External Relations who is saying this, UNSCOM is saying it. At this point in time, no clear evidence has emerged, although it should be noted that the Iraqi Government has not facilitated the task of the UNSCOM inspectors to gather evidence about this. Whenever I think about this issue, one question crops up again and again. If the Iraqi regime has nothing to hide, why do they bar access to the UN-mandated inspectors? It is not an unreasonable question to ask.
I think two conclusions stand out clearly, from whatever point people come to this argument and this debate, which is going to cause a great deal of passionate discussion in the next few weeks and months.
First, we must continue to press for full Iraqi compliance with the UN resolutions. Is there anybody in Parliament who disagrees with that? Good!
The next item is the Commission statement on the recent serious problems concerning food safety in the European Union.
Mr President, I welcome this opportunity to report on the recent contamination of the feed and food chain with medroxy-progesterone acetate, or MPA as it is commonly known.
I must stress that the Commission takes this incident very seriously indeed. It is simply unacceptable that hormones should find their way into the food and feed chains.
So, having found ourselves in this regrettable situation, what action did we take?
First, my services called an emergency meeting of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health on 10 July, with further meetings following on 16 and 24 July. These were in addition to the continuous contacts between the Commission services and their counterparts in the Member States.
These efforts were very successful in reducing the risk to public health to a minimum. However, this success was achieved at a very high cost. Very substantial quantities of food and feed had to be traced and destroyed. The impact has been particularly severe in the Netherlands.
Investigations into the factors which allowed the contamination to take place are, of course, ongoing. However, two factors in particular already stand out: firstly, the application of Community legislation on the movement and disposal of pharmaceutical waste, and secondly, the carelessness of certain feed producers in their selection of raw material suppliers.
Investigations into the onward distribution of the contaminated glucose syrup revealed that it had been delivered to feed mills and traders and, to a limited extent, to the food industry.
The contaminated feed was produced mostly for pigs, but also, to a much lesser extent, for cattle, poultry, zoo animals and pets.
This contaminated feed could be separated into two groups: a lesser quantity of highly contaminated feed distributed to 57 farms in the Netherlands and larger quantities with a low level of contamination.
In response to the situation, the Standing Committee agreed the following measures. All animals fed with highly contaminated feed would be kept under strict official control. Member States would test individual animals fed with the highly contaminated feed and only release them for consumption if results confirmed that MPA could not be detected. The authorities in the Netherlands chose to destroy pigs fed with the highly contaminated feed, thus removing them entirely from the food chain.
All samples from animals fed with the low contamination feed tested negative for the presence of MPA and the restriction was therefore lifted. Several hundred samples of glucose syrup, molasses and feed have been analysed and, as a result, thousands of tonnes of contaminated raw materials and feeding stuffs have been recalled, seized and destroyed.
The next meeting of the Standing Committee is planned for 11 September. At this meeting, the measures taken by the Member States in relation to the MPA contamination will be reviewed. However, we can already conclude that the measures were successful in limiting the potential risk to the public. They were also very successful in averting any unilateral restrictions by Member States or third countries on trade, particularly from the Netherlands.
Clearly we have to learn the lessons from the contamination and avoid any repetition. At the Agriculture Council of 15 July 2002, I repeated my call for the Member States' competent authorities for food and feed to exercise stricter control to ensure a high level of consumer health protection.
Feed and food operators need to be more aware of their responsibilities in this area. We all consider the food law a major step forward for the protection of human health. In that context, the responsibilities of feed and food operators are clearly established. Feed operators must ensure that the raw materials they buy are safe.
In the very near future the Commission will be proposing a major reform of the Community's system of official controls, in order to create a harmonised, coordinated and more effective system of controls on food and feed.
In addition, the Food and Veterinary Office is urgently investigating the operation and control of the animal feed sector. Its aim will be to pinpoint how recent contamination incidents have been allowed to occur and to identify the action that needs to be taken to prevent similar incidents arising in the future.
Furthermore, in order to complete the legal framework for the entire feed sector, the Commission will present a new proposal on feed hygiene at the earliest opportunity.
We intend to put forward general hygiene rules for the production, distribution and feeding of animals and also to enlarge the scope of the registration system for feed operations.
Under the current arrangements, only establishments dealing with certain feed additives are registered. Clearly this is not sufficient to ensure traceability of all feed materials.
In this context, a positive list of feed materials is being looked at with a view to increasing consumer protection, as Parliament itself has requested. I am pleased to say that the feasibility study you requested is nearly complete. You will receive the report with our analysis before the end of this year.
At the same time, the question arises as to whether Community legislation in relation to the waste sector is sufficiently stringent and properly implemented. I would remind you that had existing waste legislation been correctly applied in the case of MPA, it would have prevented such an incident. I alerted my colleague, Mrs Wallstrm, as soon as it became apparent that the problem involved pharmaceutical waste. Discussions have taken place with waste experts from the Member States and are continuing.
One lesson we can learn from this incident is the need for closer coordination and cooperation between the authorities responsible for the waste sector and those responsible for feed and food safety.
The authorities of the Member States involved in this affair have been asked to provide all relevant information to enable the case to be assessed from an environmental point of view. On the basis of that assessment, the Commission will take any further action deemed necessary.
Finally, it goes without saying that incidents such as this only serve to undermine our efforts to restore consumer confidence in our food supply. We need to redouble our efforts, in terms not just of legislation but also better enforcement and control, to make such incidents a thing of the past.
Mr President, food safety has been high on our parliamentary menu for the past three years. We have had scares and scandals in Europe on olive oil, contaminated wine, mineral water, listeria, salmonella, E. coli, BSE, dioxins, sludge and slurry. They all concerned our constituents and exercised our legislative minds. Now, once again, there is a problem with hormones. We discussed and debated the Food Safety White Paper and went on to pass legislation on food and feed and on the establishment of the European Food Safety Authority.
Now, our media have been full of new food scandals. 50 000 Dutch pigs condemned to be slaughtered because they were contaminated by illegal feedstuffs - illegal because of contamination by MPA hormones in feed additives. The cost to the Netherlands alone is immense, tens of millions of euros. The problem probably came, as we heard, from waste water from an American-owned pharmaceutical company in Ireland, sent by an Irish waste disposal firm to a Belgian reprocessing plant that is now bankrupt. That firm supplied glucose syrup or treacle to Dutch feed manufacturers. All 4 000 pigs were then exported from the Netherlands to Belgium. The banned hormone has been found in pigfeed in Germany. 300 German farms were banned from selling milk or animals. But pork was sold, was processed and has been eaten by humans and of course MPA in humans can cause infertility. Some of the syrup, too, ended up with soft drink manufacturers. Some of the feed ended up in Denmark, Spain, France and possibly Luxembourg and Britain.
Before I start, I should like to pass on the President's apologies for his absence. He is in Ireland on personal business.
The final draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 19 September 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament's Rules of Procedure, has been distributed. The following change has been proposed:
I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European Left/Nordic Green Left to bring forward the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East.
Mr President, I think this is a matter of common sense. Anyone who follows my group's activities knows how important the International Criminal Court is to us. After the events that have just taken place in Ramallah, however, with the bombing and besieging of the Palestinian Authority's headquarters, this matter must clearly be our priority. The suggestion you have just mentioned, namely starting Wednesday afternoon with the statements on the Middle East, is therefore particularly welcome.
Mr President, my group agrees with the modification of the agenda proposed by the GUE/NGL Group. However, given the seriousness of the events taking place, I would firstly like to add that we support the statement of the High Representative for the CFSP, Mr Solana, of 20 September; secondly, I would ask you - since no specific resolution on this issue is scheduled - to communicate, on behalf of Parliament, the resolution approved in April; and, thirdly, in the current circumstances, my group believes that the two hopeful amendments to the Brok report on the situation in the Middle East should be withdrawn.
Mr President, I simply wish to say, on behalf of my group, that we are happy with this change to the agenda, since we believe that, furthermore, this change will allow the Danish Foreign Minister to be present at the debate, meaning that there will be participation on the part of the Council.
With regard to the resolution, I agree with the concern expressed by Mr Barn, I support the comments of the High Representative for the CFSP and I would like to point out that the Brok report contains several paragraphs which express the position of this Parliament on the situation in the Near East.
Mr President, I just wanted to say that I support Mr Wurtz's proposal. As everyone is in agreement, I have nothing more to add.
Mr President, as I was saying earlier, someone has written the phrase "Chypre appartient aux Turcs" on the notice board outside my office on which various posters are displayed. I have the photocopy in question here, which I can give you. In Greece, Mr President, I am guarded by the anti-terrorist squad because I am considered to be a target for Greek terrorists. Here in Strasbourg, I take this phrase as an indirect threat, given that I am vice-chairman of the EU/Cyprus Joint Parliamentary Committee and, as such and as a Greek MEP, I do of course support the integration of Cyprus into the European Union, despite the reaction of Turkey, whose army already occupies 40% of the island.
What I am now wondering is how to protect myself from the threat which this incident no doubt represents...
If you pass the document on to the relevant services it will be forwarded to Parliament's security services for investigation.
Mr President, I have passed to the Sittings Services a report from the Commission about its Investigation and Disciplinary Office. The report represents a staggering indictment of the Commission's ability to handle its own affairs, let alone those of the people of Europe.
Over the last five years there have been 40 actions taken against individuals found to be guilty of a total of 48 infringements. Despite reported cases documented in this report of rape, fraud, paedophile pornography, misuse of funds, harassment, theft, forgery, striking and wounding, depraved behaviour, aggression, corruption and conflict of interest, only one individual has been dismissed in the last five years. The Commission's own disciplinary process is clearly unable to take the appropriate action against employees who commit hideous and, in some cases, criminal offences.
This Parliament needs to know that those responsible for this failure have themselves been removed from their posts. What new immediate measures are being put in place to improve the process and what police action has resulted from any of these infringements over the last five years? I ask you to refer this matter to President Prodi as a matter of urgency.
Your comments have been noted, we have your document and we will pass it on to Mr Prodi.
The first item is the vote on two requests for urgent procedure in relation to:
a proposal from the Commission for a Council decision providing further macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [COM(2002) 436 - C5-0401/2002 - 2002/0192(CNS)]
a proposal from the Commission for a Council decision providing further macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina [COM(2002) 437 - C5-0402/2002 - 2002/0193(CNS)].
Mr President, in actual fact, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy originally considered that, for procedural reasons, this urgency should not be authorised, since this is the third or fourth time that the Council has proposed the urgent procedure in relation to these issues, when really it should present them on time so that Parliament can give its opinion within the usual timescales.
However, in the end, considering the situation in Bosnia Herzegovina and in Yugoslavia, bearing in mind that this will be the last time we authorise an urgency - we ask the Commission and the Council in the future to act in full accordance with the norms - we are prepared to accept the urgent procedure.
Mr President, a letter was sent from Commissioner Patten to the President of Parliament yesterday asking Parliament to adopt, as quickly as possible, Supplementary and Amending Budget No 4 in order to allow the budgetisation of the EUR 70 million for Afghanistan. The additional funding is consistent with the pledge made by the Commission in Tokyo last January.
At the trialogue which was held yesterday evening between 9 p.m. and 10.30 p.m., an agreement was reached between the representatives of Parliament and the Council that Supplementary and Amending Budget No 4 should be adopted as quickly as possible, as already approved by the Council. On the basis of the letter from Commissioner Patten, could I ask you to consider the vote on the SAB 4 as an urgency, so that we can adopt it during this part-session? If that is agreed to, then we will be calling a meeting of the Committee on Budgets at 10.30 a.m. this morning. I should therefore like to inform those of my colleagues who do not already know, that there will be a meeting of the Committee on Budgets at 10.30 a.m. today in place of the coordinators' meeting that was planned.
As soon as your Committee tables the report, it can be placed on the agenda. As there are no problems we will deal with it this week.
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0289/2002) by Jonas Sjstedt on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms (COM(2002) 85 - C5-0079/2002 - 2002/0046(COD)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should firstly like to thank Mr Sjstedt, who is rapporteur for this subject and who has made a sterling contribution to this complicated area. It is an area that is important not only for ourselves here in Europe but also for the rest of the world and, in particular, for our partners in the developing countries.
As you must be aware, the Protocol we are to debate today is linked to the European Community's recently implemented ratification of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. The overarching purpose of this UN agreement is to establish common rules for the transboundary movement of genetically modified organisms with the objective of creating global protection of biological diversity and human health.
The European Union must fulfil its international obligations. We must therefore incorporate the provisions of the Protocol on Biosafety into our legislation. This proposal supplements the Community's existing regulations, particularly on the issue of the export of genetically modified organisms, so that it is in greater accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on Biosafety.
The proposal consists of the following main parts. Firstly, the obligation to give notice of exports of genetically modified organisms intended for deliberate release into the environment. Secondly, the obligation to inform our international partners about the Community's methods, legislation and decisions concerning genetically modified organisms, as well as about any unintentional release of such organisms. Thirdly, a set of rules to be used for identifying genetically modified organisms for export. These rules are in accordance with the latest developments within Community legislation on genetically modified organisms and, in particular, with the provisions of the draft regulation on traceability and marking.
The present proposal contains no new special Community provisions concerning imports by one Member State from another, or movements between Member States, of genetically modified organisms. Such imports or movements will, in the future too, be covered by existing Community legislation. I would emphasise in no uncertain terms how important it is for the work on this proposal to proceed swiftly. The EU has played a key role in the international negotiations right from the beginning. We must show that there is no doubt that we shall fulfil our commitments and that we shall be able to implement the Protocol in full as soon as it comes into force.
Mr President, when the Cartagena Protocol was adopted a couple of years ago, it constituted major progress both for the European Union and the EU countries. The Protocol is based on the precautionary principle and respects the right of states to have stricter national rules governing the trade in genetically modified products. The Protocol is an important example of the way in which global trade regulations can be based on environmental and consumer protection. It constitutes a positive alternative to parts of the World Trade Organisation's practice.
With the adoption of the proposed law we are now debating, the Cartagena Protocol will become EU law. While existing EU rules would apply to imports, the proposed law would regulate exports from the EU. It is a matter of urgency that the rules be adopted. The number of countries ratifying the Protocol is increasing, so that it will soon be possible for it formally to come into force. By adopting this legislation, the EU can become a positive global example in this area. We in Parliament should like to cooperate closely with the Commission and the Council to ensure that these laws are made ready as swiftly as possible.
As rapporteur, I believe that the Commission's proposed legislation has quite a few weaknesses. In important areas, the proposals do not go as far as the Cartagena Protocol itself, and in other areas the proposals create an unnecessary lack of clarity. I and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy therefore propose tightening up on a number of points. It must not be possible to export seeds or products not approved for use within the European Union. Only for reasons concerned, for example, with the climate, will it be possible for seeds to be exempted from this rule. We cannot have one set of safety and consumer protection measures for ourselves, and another set for others. In order for products to be approved for export, the importing country must be required expressly to have approved their importation. It must never be possible for a failure to respond to be interpreted as authorisation, as it in actual fact could be under the Commission's proposed law. That especially applies to countries with limited technical capacity in this area, for it is crucial to ensure that they genuinely recommend the imports and are able to handle them. The actual exporter shall always be responsible for notification. That is important in order to prevent a lack of clarity where the matter of responsibility is concerned. It is also more in line with what is in actual fact prescribed by the Cartagena Protocol.
In the continued negotiations within the framework of the Cartagena Protocol, the European Union must support proposals for international regulations explaining companies' legal responsibilities. The public's right to information about what is exported must be both clarified and reinforced, at the same time as respect for legitimate company secrets is maintained. EU regulations must also make it unambiguously clear that exports to other countries must always respect the stricter rules which these countries are entitled to introduce, and this in full accordance with the Cartagena Protocol.
I therefore hope to see the adoption of as large a proportion as possible of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, as well as of the amendments tabled jointly by the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and the Group of the Party of European Socialists. I also wish to thank the responsible Commission officials for their very helpful cooperation. I would also thank my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it was in the year 2000 that the European Union signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, an international agreement which is now to be implemented, and as quickly as possible.
The Protocol aims, by applying international rules to trade in living GMOs, to prevent effects detrimental to biodiversity and to human health. It governs the safe transfer, handling and use of genetically modified organisms, placing the emphasis on their movement across borders. For this there is to be a procedure involving the prior informed consent of the importing country. In the case of GMOs intended for immediate use as foodstuffs and feedingstuffs, or for processing, it envisages notification to the Commission or to the Biosafety Clearing House.
the Council and Commission statements on the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development;
report (A5-0237/2002) by Mrs Hulthn, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Commission communication on the implementation of the first phase of the European Climate Change Programme [COM(2001) 580 - C5-0164/2002 - 2002/2072(COS)].
In opening this debate, I am pleased to be able to give the floor to President Haarder, formerly one of our fellow Members and Vice-President of the European Parliament, who will now speak on behalf of the Council as President-in-Office of the Council.
Mr President, thank you for your very friendly welcome. The World Summit in Johannesburg took place from 26 August to 4 September 2002. There was a very high level of participation from parliaments, NGOs and trade and industry. The Danish Presidency - the Danish Minister for the Environment - attached great importance to remaining in close contact with participants from the European Parliament. I believe a number of you present here will be able to confirm this.
I would like to compliment Parliament on Mr Lannoye's report, which was adopted in April and was an important document in the whole process. We faced a great challenge. As a leading player, we had to encourage the viewpoints established at the previous Council meetings of Environment, Development and Foreign Ministers in Seville. We had to achieve a good outcome and obtain the greatest possible influence, and that was not a particularly easy task in view of the many viewpoints and divergent interests with which we are all familiar.
As you know, the decision to hold the summit was taken by the UN General Assembly in autumn 2000, the same year in which the Millennium Summit adopted the eight Millennium Goals for reducing poverty by 2015. The mandate from the General Assembly for Johannesburg included identifying new challenges and opportunities for sustainable development, as well as policies and means of supporting developing countries and countries with transitional economies in their efforts.
In parallel with the lead-up to Johannesburg, two other international conferences were held at ministerial level: the WTO's ministerial conference in Doha in November 2001, which adopted the agenda for the negotiating round on trade and development, and the Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey in March, at which an historic agreement was entered into on funding and good governance. At the same time, for the first time in many years, new and substantial promises of aid were given by the rich countries. From 2006 onwards these assurances will increase the total aid volume by around 25% annually.
Within the EU, we greatly desired to establish development targets in a number of areas that were not covered by the Millennium Goals or by previous agreements. We wanted to insist on the results achieved previously with respect to human rights, workers' rights, equality and good governance, and we wanted to ensure effective follow-up.
In a number of aspects these desires were satisfied, and I will now mention the most significant of these.
As regards globalisation, we attached importance to reflecting the positive opportunities that exist as a result of globalisation and to emphasising the social dimension and corporate responsibility.
We were able to define the combating of poverty as crucial for sustainable development in a context that encompasses not only increasing prosperity but also access to clean drinking water, sanitation, energy, better health and equality.
We were able to establish a number of practical objectives, with deadlines for achieving them, within the areas of poverty, health, the environment and natural resources. One of the most important of these is the objective of halving the number of people without access to basic sanitation by 2015. This should be seen as a supplement to the Millennium Goal of halving the number of people without access to clean drinking water by 2015. Other targets adopted were restoring and regulating fish stocks at sustainable levels by 2015, ensuring absolutely minimal risk and harmful effects on health and the environment from the production of chemicals by 2020 and substantially reducing the loss of biodiversity by 2010.
In addition, there is an agreement to establish a ten-year framework programme for sustainable production and consumption which tackles the crucial problem of the separation of economic growth from deterioration of the environment.
The most difficult negotiations conducted were without doubt those concerning the target for sustainable energy. No practical target, with a deadline for achieving it, was adopted due to opposition from the USA, Japan and the OPEC countries in particular, but we did obtain an objective of increasing the global proportion of sustainable energy at the earliest possible date. What is worthy of note, however, is that we succeeded in gaining substantial acknowledgement of the advantages of sustainable energy at an international summit for the first time. This is the greatest pronouncement adopted to date in this area. Furthermore, in cooperation with a number of other countries, the EU submitted a declaration to continue working on this issue.
These goals and objectives from Johannesburg together with the Millennium Goals provide a concrete agenda for our work on national, regional and international efforts over the coming 10-15 years.
The assurances on trade and subsidies given at Doha to increase market access for developing countries and support the phasing out of subsidies which distort trade were confirmed. Johannesburg placed greater political focus on the actual WTO process and its significance for developing countries. We now have a great duty to live up to these expectations in the forthcoming negotiations.
The agreements reached at Monterrey on financing for development and the significance of good governance in attracting investment and funding were affirmed. Those donors that had promised new funding in Monterrey confirmed this. Moreover, a number of EU countries took the initiative at the summit jointly to procure further voluntary contributions of approx. USD 80 million in order to increase the Global Environmental Facility to a level of USD 3 000 million, the original target for the top-up.
Finally, we were able to establish that the social dimension is to be promoted and that the consensus achieved previously on the role, rights and equality of women is to be adhered to. The EU submitted a declaration on this, since the issue of the role of women was not given as strong a position as we would have liked.
Importance was attached to the national responsibility for good governance, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. We succeeded in establishing that the national sustainability strategies - which may be formulated as poverty strategies - must be ready for implementation in 2005. I would also add that indigenous peoples were also mentioned in the declaration.
With regard to partnerships, the ground was prepared for greater interaction between the public sector, private organisations and private businesses in the implementation of the goals set. In addition, the EU launched two new ambitious initiatives within the priority areas of water and energy, namely 'Water for Life' and 'Sustainable Energy for Poverty Reduction'.
I agree with Parliament that the crucial thing is implementing this, turning words into deeds. Johannesburg created the momentum for more effective implementation of the agenda on sustainable development. The private sector will be more involved. There was a clear message from business that in their investments and production they accept their responsibility for local communities and the environment.
International follow-up will be carried out under the auspices of the UN. This is an important issue on which we must continue working. The World Bank and the World Trade Organisation should also be involved.
These words must be turned into deeds. The Presidency attaches great importance to effective follow-up of both the internal and the global dimension of the EU's obligations for bringing about sustainable development. In this context we have a particular duty to follow up our own initiatives in respect of water and energy.
Finally, I would like to mention that yesterday the ASEM Summit was held between 25 European and Asian Heads of State and Government. In preparation for this summit I presided over a conference of Finance Ministers from these countries last Thursday and I am pleased to report that much of the agenda that we have discussed here was discussed with our Asian partners, and that it was decided to initiate a series of preparatory activities between the EU and Asia so that we can ensure that progress is made in Cancn and elsewhere where the WTO process is to be continued. Lastly, I would like to say that it is important that, when we talk about these things, we in Europe realise that, although we may be major players, we need partners who want the same things as us. And both I and Commissioner Pascal Lamy are very pleased that we got as far as we did with our Asian colleagues last week and yesterday. I therefore believe there is reason for a hint of optimism as regards the opportunity to make further substantial progress in the year ahead.
Mr President, we welcome this opportunity to present the Commission's assessment of the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg concluded three weeks ago.
It is in a way rather early to make a definitive assessment of the outcome. Time and our own committed efforts will tell if this summit will deliver where Rio de Janeiro did not. As we said repeatedly at the end of the negotiations, we have the words and it is now the duty of all of us to turn these words into effective deeds.
Activities of the European Ombudsman (2001) Deliberations of the Committee on Petitions 2001-2002
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
the report (A5-0267/2002) by Mr Wyn, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman for the year 2001 [C5-0296/2002 - 2002/2086(COS)], and
the report (A5-0271/2002) by Mr Koukiadis, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2001-2002 [2002/2019(INI)].
Madam President, on 1 September 1995 the Ombudsman's office started work. From then until 15 September 2002, the office received 10 535 complaints, of which 10 437 have been examined.
We carried out 1 385 full inquiries of which 19 were own-initiative inquiries. 1 149 of these cases involved the Commission, 137 cases involved the European Parliament's administration, 53 concerned the Council and 12 concerned the European Investment Bank.
Looking at the results, 345 cases were settled by the institution concerned, after the Ombudsman had informed it of the complaint.
In 206 cases a critical remark was made, in 48 cases the inquiry resulted in a draft accommodation or proposal for a friendly solution, most of it achieved a success for the complainant.
In six cases a special report was made to the European Parliament, in four of these cases Parliament upheld the Ombudsman's recommendations, and two other cases are still pending.
In 659 cases, a thorough inquiry resulted in the Ombudsman finding that there was no maladministration in the activities of the institution.
When cases are outside the Ombudsman's mandate, we always try to advise the complainant of another body that could deal with the matter. We advised the complainant to go to the national or regional Ombudsman, or petition a national or regional Parliament in 2 293 cases, to petition the European Parliament in 884 cases and to address the Commission in 913 cases.
Over the years, critical voices have been raised, saying that the Ombudsman is not sufficiently known, and that the results for citizens are inadequate because the institutions neither cooperate nor respect their obligation of good administration. Some critical voices have also suggested that the mandate is too narrow and that the European Ombudsman should deal with complaints concerning Community law wherever it is applied in the Union or even be a People's Tribune, always ready to condemn injustice wherever it occurs.
The European Ombudsman is certainly one of the best-known ombudsman institutions in the world. Our information campaign is in 12 languages and addresses 350 million citizens and residents of 15 Member States. We have visited every Member State, issued press releases, published information brochures and given many lectures and seminars to publicise the work.
One of the most effective ways of communicating with such a vast audience is via the Internet. Around 2 500 websites contain an active link to the European Ombudsman's site and nearly 42 % of complaints are now submitted electronically, many of them using the on line complaint form.
The steady increase in the number of complaints is the best proof that the Ombudsman is better and better known. Almost 200 new complaints arrive each month, nearly a 300% increase compared with the first full year of cooperation in 1996.
The results of the Ombudsman's work for European citizens are also impressive. As well as obtaining redress in individual cases, we have achieved major improvements in the general functioning of the institution. Three of these call for special mention.
First we persuaded the institutions and some bodies, including the European Central Bank and Europol, to improve public access to their documents.
Second, an own-initiative inquiry led 17 institutions and bodies to adopt codes of good administration, based on a draft suggested by us. Following a special report, the European Parliament last year adopted a revised version of the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour. We have distributed this improved version of the Code widely throughout the institutions and to European citizens, whose right to good administration the Code embodies. As instructed by the European Parliament, we apply the Code in deciding whether or not there is maladministration.
The third achievement concerns the Charter of Fundamental Rights, proclaimed in Nice in December 2000. The Ombudsman proposed the idea that the Charter should include the right to good administration. This was included as Article 41 of the Charter.
The Ombudsman has also promoted the full and correct application of the Charter. The Union institutions solemnly proclaim the Charter to the citizens as embodying their fundamental rights. The Ombudsman therefore regards the institutions' failure to respect those rights in their own activities as maladministration.
Furthermore, the Ombudsman's proposals to the European Convention include the idea that the Charter should be legally binding wherever Community law applies.
Contrary to what the critical voices say, the institutions and bodies deserve credit for their mainly cooperative attitude to the Ombudsman. They have usually responded properly, fully and promptly to the Ombudsman's inquiries and have been willing to accept the Ombudsman's friendly solutions and draft recommendations.
Problems have arisen in only a small number of cases. In one case concerning access to information, the Commission rejected the Ombudsman's draft recommendation and has failed to act on a resolution of the European Parliament supporting the Ombudsman. I regret that this case seems to be part of a more general trend towards the misuse of data protection rules to halt or reverse the commitment to openness.
Most of the institutions and bodies have also adopted a code of good administrative behaviour. I still cannot understand why Parliament's resolution of September 2001, calling for a European administrative law, has not been followed up.
To me, a uniform set of rules applying to all the institutions and bodies could only enhance the Union's relations with its citizens.
I also regret that the Staff Regulations maintain the outdated requirement of prior approval of publications by civil servants.
I acknowledge that the European Ombudsman's mandate is limited. I have consistently maintained the view that a network of ombudsmen and petitions committees is needed to supervise the application of Community law by the Member States. We have developed such a network, to share information, give advice and ensure that complaints go to the most competent body.
Further development of the network could help the Commission, as the Guardian of the Treaties, to focus its resources on the most important issues of principle.
During the night of 26 and 27 September 2002, a Senegalese vessel, Le Joola, carrying more than 1 000 people, sank near the Senegalese-Gambian coast. Now, nearly two weeks later, 476 bodies have been recovered from the sea and 500 remain missing.
On behalf of Parliament, I wrote to express our sincere condolences to President Wade of Senegal and to invite him to convey our condolences to the families of the victims. It is important today that we should, in a solemn moment of silence, show our respect for the dead and the bereaved and to connect, from the northern hemisphere, with this African tragedy as an act of reassurance and solidarity that the south matters to us. I ask you to observe one minute's silence.
Last Sunday, 6 October 2002, his Royal Highness Prince Claus von Amsburg, husband of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, died in Amsterdam after a long illness. Prince Claus committed himself to Dutch society with strength, seriousness, dedication and, when appropriate, with humour.
We are well aware of his dedication to the cause of international development cooperation. I would like to inform the House and our Dutch colleagues that, on your behalf and on their behalf, I have transmitted our sincere condolences to Her Majesty, Queen Beatrix and to the Dutch people.
The Danish Presidency, represented by Mr Haarder, Minister for European Affairs, has expressed its willingness to make a statement on behalf of the Council on the situation regarding Iraq. Mr Haarder and the Danish Presidency are stepping into this at short notice. I want on behalf of Parliament to thank the Council and personally to thank Mr Haarder for doing so.
The first item is the Commission report on the progress made towards enlargement. These reports were adopted before lunch today by the European Commission. With the adoption and publication of the accession country reports, we are now one significant step nearer to the creation of a truly continental-scale European Union.
We are entering the final stage of a process which began with such inspiration almost thirteen years ago with the collapse of the Berlin Wall. Our Member States and not just the accession states must individually and collectively summon up the necessary political will to overcome the last remaining obstacles. In this House we are determined to use our best endeavours to ensure that insofar as we can make a contribution, this House will contribute to the removal of any remaining obstacles between now and the Copenhagen Summit in December.
This enlargement represents for Europe an extraordinary and unparalleled act of reconciliation, healing and opportunity. It is the first time in millennia in our old continent that, by the free wills of free and sovereign people, we will be coming together neither forced at the point of a sword nor through the barrel of a gun nor any other oppressive force but by the use of reason, conviction and shared values. Today's debate is an important staging-post in this exercise.
I would like in particular to pay a tribute to the European Commission and its services and to all of those in leadership positions and in the public services of accession states who have engaged in such extraordinary work of transformation. The Commission will remain central to the management of this exercise right to the end. We are coming to a time when we, the political class, must undertake our political responsibilities to reach out to our publics in terms of the calculus of consent.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is with great emotion that I take the floor to speak to this House today.
When I took office, I made a commitment - before this very House - to make enlargement the top priority of my Commission, to make my Commission the Commission of enlargement, because in enlarging the European Union we will be consolidating an area of peace, security and democracy throughout the European continent. Three years later, I am standing here before you once again to tell you that this commitment has been honoured. The Commission has done its job and kept its promise.
The Commission has carried out a careful study of the progress made by the candidate countries and I can now announce the names of the countries with which we recommend the Council should conclude negotiations by the end of 2002. I will now, if I may, read out the key points of the recommendations we adopted today.
'Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia fulfil the political criteria. Bearing in mind the progress achieved by these countries, the track record in implementing their commitments, and taking into account their preparatory work in progress and foreseen, the Commission considers that these countries will have fulfilled the economic and acquis criteria and will be ready for membership from the beginning of 2004. The Commission therefore recommends to conclude the accession negotiations with these countries by the end of this year with the aim to sign the Accession Treaty in spring 2003.'
In view of Bulgaria's and Romania's progress over the last year, the Commission notes the date - 2007 - that those countries have set themselves for accession. The Commission will do everything necessary to ensure that this objective can be achieved.
Through constitutional reform and a series of legislative packages, Turkey has made considerable progress as regards the Copenhagen criteria. However, further efforts are needed. The Commission is therefore recommending that the European Union give more support and allocate more resources to Turkey's pre-accession preparations. To this end, the Commission will propose a revised Accession Partnership and step up legislative scrutiny. Turkey is encouraged to pursue its reform process and so advance its candidacy for European Union membership.
Ladies and gentleman, just 13 years ago, Berlin was still divided by the wall of shame. The wall has been pulled down and Germany has been reunified. This re-establishment of freedom has allowed us to restore the historical unity of the peoples of Europe. Our common destiny is once again to build a common future, a future built on the fundamental values we share of peace, democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights and the protection of minorities.
In 1993, the Copenhagen European Council offered the countries of Central and Eastern Europe the chance to join the European Union. Since then, these countries have gone through a huge process of change, moving peacefully from dictatorship to stable, participatory democracy.
Their achievements are extraordinary. In the space of a decade, we have seen the holding of dozens of transparent, democratic national, regional and local elections, the adoption of thousands of laws and regulations giving shape to the new democracies and incorporating the Community acquis into national law, the training of tens of thousands of civil servants and magistrates to interpret and apply the new legislation and the participation of hundreds of thousands of elected officials, specialists and members of professional organisations in EU-financed training and cooperation projects in order to learn about our policies. All 12 countries satisfy the political criteria laid down at Copenhagen and democratic institutions are stronger everywhere. Lastly, the overall performance of the economies of the ten first-wave countries is gradually improving: their growth rates are higher than ours, their inflation rates and deficits are being managed and kept under control and direct foreign investment is flooding in. This proves that the markets have confidence.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report we adopted today also highlights the remaining deficiencies in some sectors, for some countries. These failings have to be remedied before accession: the Commission will work with the authorities of these countries to ensure that the problems are resolved in good time. Our concerns continue to be centred on the administrative capacity of these countries and their justice systems, which are undermined by a lack of financial and, above all, human resources. We have endeavoured to address these problems through a EUR 250 million support programme. This programme is starting to bear fruit.
Another weakness we have identified is inadequate preparation for implementation of the acquis in a number of crucial areas, namely customs services, taxation, veterinary and plant-health controls, the institutions managing and supervising agricultural policy and, lastly, the departments in charge of managing and controlling the Structural Funds.
I should also mention a further two extremely serious problems: the corruption affecting many of these countries, with a few exceptions, and the shameful issue of the trafficking of human beings. This does not mean that nothing has been done in these fields. On the contrary, a great deal has been achieved already and the operation is almost complete in some countries. However, our report stresses the scrupulous monitoring the Commission has undertaken to conduct up until accession. We shall publish a final evaluation six months before the date of accession.
To cope with the complexities of enlargement, the Commission will take all the necessary measures to reorganise its departments, increasing monitoring and support for the new Member States after accession and providing pre-accession aid for the countries that will follow those covered by today's recommendation.
Mr President, our objective is still to sign the Accession Treaty in spring 2003. We are therefore entering the final stages of the process. In this regard, the Commission hopes that the Brussels European Council of 24 and 25 October will take the necessary decisions on the chapters still open, namely agriculture, financial issues and institutions. In this way, we can negotiate and conclude these chapters before Copenhagen. As regards Bulgaria and Romania, the Commission will put forward proposals for an enhanced pre-accession strategy in good time for adoption by the Copenhagen Council. Then for Turkey, which does not yet meet the accession criteria, the Commission will propose an enhanced pre-accession strategy with extra financial resources in the new year.
The next item is the report (A5-0303/2002) by Mr Jorge Moreira Da Silva on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive (COM(2001) 581 - C5-0578/2001 - 2001/0245(COD)) establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC.
Mr President, I am pleased to be able to address the European Parliament on the emissions trading proposal. I am proud of this proposal because I see it as a cornerstone of the European Union's cost-effective implementation of the Kyoto Protocol.
First, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Moreira Da Silva, for his unstinting efforts in bringing this proposal to its first reading. I know there were approximately 500 amendments in Committee, but we now have a much more manageable 100 amendments
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to use my opening words to express my thanks for the excellent cooperation I have enjoyed with the draftsmen and the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups. It is due to this cooperation alone that we were able to reach a good compromise in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
I believe that this directive will create the conditions for climate change and the Kyoto Protocol to stop being a purely theoretical concern in Europe and become an essential strand of the environmental and economic policy of all the Member States. Essentially, this directive will form the basis of the carbon economy; the winners will be those who are able to achieve the same levels of production with the fewest emissions. I therefore congratulate the Commission, in the person of Commissioner Margot Wallstrm, on the initiative of proposing this directive, particularly because it will significantly reduce the cost of complying with Kyoto in the European Union. As a matter of fact, I believe that proving that this system works, proving that this system will reduce the cost of complying with Kyoto in the European Union, will be the best way for us to convince our US friends to abide by the Kyoto Protocol.
Nevertheless, despite considering the proposal for a directive to be positive on the whole, there are areas in which Parliament wishes both to go further and to improve the basic proposal and a broad compromise was reached on these matters. Consequently, rather than putting forward my own point of view, I am speaking on behalf of all of those who adopted this compromise. Firstly, I think it is important that this directive has quantified targets for compliance and we feel it is crucial that there should be a maximum ceiling on emission allowances per Member State, on a linear curve converging with the Kyoto Protocol.
Secondly, we feel it is important that the Member States should be able to add to the sectors and activities included in the system. I am thinking about the voluntary 'opting in' of sectors such as transport or small and medium-sized enterprises in the Member States that feel it would be appropriate.
Thirdly, the use of credits must be completely prohibited in the directive's first implementation period.
Fourthly, we consider it important that the directive should cover all six greenhouse gases, not only carbon dioxide, provided that these six gases are included on the basis of transparent criteria, identical to those used for carbon dioxide.
Fifthly, we believe it is important that the chemicals and aluminium industries should also be included in this directive.
Lastly, with regard to the areas in which we feel that the Commission's proposal ought to be extended and made more ambitious - and I am referring to the initial emissions allowance allocation system - I think that a hybrid system based on free allocation but with some auctioning (5% in the first period, 15% in the second period) is better than a 100% free allocation as advocated in the proposal for a directive, not only in the economic strand, but also in the environmental strand and as regards reducing distortion of competition.
I have left what I believe to be the most important issue to the end: legal involvement. It is my view that this system can only work if it is legally binding, in other words, mandatory. I believe the Committee on the Environment achieved a good compromise on legal involvement, a binding system with the temporary exclusion - with limits on both the duration and the conditions - of some companies in the first period. I believe the adoption of Amendments Nos 75 and 81 to be quite unjustified and even dangerous, because this would basically mean turning a binding system into a voluntary one and consequently increasing distortions of competition, reducing the liquidity in the market, increasing the price per tonne of carbon dioxide and reducing the economic efficiency of the system.
Mr President, first of all, I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Moreira da Silva, the other draftsmen of opinions and the shadow rapporteurs for the pleasant working relationship that produced the proposal that is now before us. I should note in this respect that it became abundantly clear during the process that the proposal on emissions trading is controversial. Consequently, differences of opinion among the supporters and opponents of the scheme resulted in an overwhelming number of amendments.
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, I call for a uniform and transparent emissions trading scheme, a scheme which clearly describes the rights and duties for the government and industry. It should, however, also do justice to industry's entirely unique dynamic, a dynamic in which continuity and scope for competition are not unnecessarily hampered by new rules.
It is therefore gratifying to see that in the final report that is now before us, a number of amendments tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs have been adopted in order to achieve this. I am particularly referring to extending the period of time in Article 11, adapting the penalty clause in Article 16 and the way in which Member States tax the emissions trading scheme in Article 16, Paragraph 4. Clarity about factors that distort the market promotes the effectiveness of a market for emission rights. It is therefore regrettable that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy failed to reach agreement on the way rights will be allocated from 2008.
It still is of great importance to remain alert with regard to measures that Member States may take in order to intervene in a market for emissions trading by introducing its own schemes and taxes. Resistance to an emissions trading scheme will continue to exist among various parties and will lead to the rules being bypassed. A lack of clarity in the directive should therefore not mean that emissions trading is doomed to fail. The saying 'the proof of the pudding is in the eating' therefore very much applies to emissions trading.
Mr President, I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market. My colleague, Mr Blokland, just said that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. I would like to say that those who have not thought about emissions trading might consider how a lobster is eaten. Imagine that you have a large lobster on a plate in front of you. First it is quite easy to get very large and juicy mouthfuls from it, but things then become quite difficult when you get to the small claws and joints, and then you leave them on the plate because it is no longer really worth the bother of going on with the meal. The idea now of course is that emissions trading will help us find the juicy targets for reductions in emissions, ones where a reduction in emissions is cost-effective and where it really is worth the bother, and perhaps the more difficult targets can be left to last or be dealt with in other ways.
Effective means are needed to realise the Kyoto Protocol commitments. I would like to say that the wisest course of action is to start now, because in all likelihood the obligations under the Kyoto Protocol will enter into force from 2008. We know that in business those that get in early often also reap the highest profits.
The report by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy fulfils all the key requirements for a good emissions trading system. Firstly, Parliament will vote today on the proposal to significantly extend the emissions market with the inclusion of new sectors, including new gases. That way we can be sure there will be enough sellers and buyers in the market. As regards the flexibility that the Member States have been looking for, I believe the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has found the best possible flexible approach, so that Member States, subject to certain conditions, may temporarily exclude some installations from the emissions trading scheme. This, I think, was an excellent solution, and one which the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market also proposed.
Most important of all is the notion that in allocating these emission allowances we should adhere to the criteria whereby companies that have already attended to the matter of reducing their emissions are encouraged and rewarded. In fact the auction debate is connected with this very issue, because auctions would introduce that element that would encourage and reward the trendsetters.
I hope Parliament will accept at least a small proportion of auctioned allowances. We on the committee and in Parliament as a whole have enjoyed some quite excellent levels of cooperation. I wish to thank both the rapporteur and the Commission in particular very much for this.
Thank you, Mrs Hautala. Perhaps you would also let us know where you like eating lobster, as you use it as such an elegant example.
Mr President, I am not going to speak about lobsters, but I share the interests of the two previous speakers. Mr President, you know everything by definition, so you already know the opinion of the Industry Committee. In case there are any colleagues here who do not know, it is my role to report it.
There was a broad spread of opinions in the Industry Committee, as I shall briefly describe. I will summarise a number of key points which our discussions centred around. First of all, perhaps most importantly, should the scheme be compulsory or should there be opt-outs or exemptions? There were a number of voices from certain national quarters asking for exemptions. Other committee members believed that if we allowed exemptions, everyone would ask for one and there would be no directive, so there was a dilemma there.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 10 October 2002.
Colleagues, it is my sad duty today to mark the deaths of innocent people in two recent attacks. We still do not know the exact toll of casualties caused by the car bombs in Kuta Beach, Bali on 12 October. Our sympathy and condolences go to the families of all those 200 victims and more than 250 wounded. They were victims of a terrible crime which, on behalf of this Parliament, I condemn utterly. It is an unacceptable cost to pay for the lesson that stronger cooperation and constant vigilance are needed by all of us in the fight against terrorism.
The apparently unrelated attack in Vantaa, near Helsinki, that killed other innocents going about their business on the previous day, is also an act I condemn. I extend on your behalf our sympathy to the families of the bereaved.
I ask you now to observe one minute's silence as a token of our respect and sympathy for the innocent victims of these attacks.
Before we come to the order of business, I am pleased to take the opportunity to report to you something you will have heard about over the last twenty-four hours: the resounding 'yes' vote in the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Nice.
The vote was carried by a majority in all 42 national constituencies in the country, reversing the previous vote where 40 constituencies had voted 'no'. The message I would draw from that for our Parliament today is that the leaders attending the summit meeting in Brussels on Friday should now understand clearly that there should be no new roadblocks on the road to enlargement. The time to bring closure to enlargement is at hand. October's preparations for the summit meeting in Copenhagen in December now offer the opportunity to bring closure to this historic act of European reconciliation.
The final draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 17 October 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament's Rules of Procedure, has been distributed.
As 70 individual amendments had been tabled to the report A5-340/02 by Mrs Grossette on the Community Code for medicinal products for human use, in addition to the 132 amendments contained in the report itself, I had, pursuant to Rule 130a, after consulting its Chairman, asked the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy to meet to consider the amendments.
A number of amendments, however, have been withdrawn in the meantime and a number are similar to those adopted in committee. In the light of these changes, it would be more appropriate for me not to refer the report back to committee, but to allow it instead to be voted in plenary.
Mr President, you are indeed right to specify that point. Initially, 70 amendments had been tabled since the vote in committee. According to the latest figures, we are now dealing with 52 amendments. Of these 52 amendments, around 30 were rejected by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and many others had already received a number of votes within the committee.
I do not think that an additional meeting of the competent committee would be of much benefit, and would not really allow the situation to be clarified. If the Members concerned are prepared to make the effort to withdraw the superfluous amendments, Wednesday's vote could be a great success.
Mr President, it is a very wise decision of yours not to require us to have another committee meeting. That starts the week on a good note.
However, you might like to ask somebody - I suspect it will be the inevitable Mr Corbett - to have a look at the Rules, because they are rather strange. They state that: 'When over 50 amendments have been tabled to a report, the President may, after consulting its chairman, request the committee responsible to meet to consider the amendments.' That leaves you and me looking through a lot of amendments that can sometimes be rather confusing. What we need is either to have a stringent rule simply stating: 'When over 50 amendments have been tabled to a report, the President must request the committee to meet again', or else to drop this. As it stands, it leaves it between the two of us. I am only happy to say that I support your very wise decision.
Mr President, I too think it is a wise decision and it shows that it is right that there be flexibility in this rule. It is an option open to the President after consulting the chair of the committee responsible, to be used when it will be useful and not to be used when it will not be useful. The proceedings today have shown that, even when it is not used, it serves a purpose in putting on pressure for amendments to be withdrawn, thereby saving the rest of us a lot of time later in plenary.
Pursuant to Rule 111a I have received a request from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for an extraordinary debate to be held during this part-session on the financing of the nuclear sector in North Korea in the context of the declared nuclear weapon programme. The Commission has announced that Commissioner Patten could address this issue on Tuesday at 9 p.m.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of December 2001, we voted on a report on strategy and organisation for energy development in the Korean peninsula, as a result of which we decided to participate in civil nuclear development in Korea.
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy by:
Mrs Rosemarie Mller (A5-0330/2002) on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products [COM(2001) 404 - C5-0591/2001 - 2001/0252(COD)];
Mrs Franoise Grossette (A5-0340/2002) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use [COM(2001) 404 - C5-0592/2001 - 2001/0253(COD)];
Mrs Franoise Grossette (A5-0334/2002) on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products [COM(2001) 404 - C5-0593/2001 - 2001/0254(COD)].
. Mr President, before briefly introducing the three Commission proposals, I would like to thank and congratulate the two rapporteurs, Mrs Mller and Mrs Grossette, as well as the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy for all the work and effort they have put into finalising these three reports.
Let me start with the objectives of the proposals. There are three. First and foremost, to guarantee a high level of health protection for European citizens, and that is always the starting point. Secondly, to increase the availability of innovative medicinal products and, at the same time, favour competition with generic products, and, thirdly, to prepare for enlargement, which will very soon become a reality.
As far as the concrete proposals are concerned, I will concentrate on three of them. First, the need to reinforce the role of the European Medicines Evaluation Agency and the centralised procedure. Why? Because the objective is to make new innovative medicines available to all EU citizens, at the same time. This is a question of equality of all patients in Europe. Thus, the Commission has proposed that the centralised authorisation procedure for all medicines containing new active substances be made mandatory. This is the Community solution to the issue of innovation availability and I hope that this House will support it. Additionally, this would produce economies of scale, save resources and time and, finally, lead to improved regulatory efficiency.
The Commission wants, especially in the enlarged EU, to ensure that patients have quicker access to innovative medicines. The mutual recognition procedure has shown its limits. The evaluation process at the London agency takes an average of 180 days - clearly fewer than the maximum of 210 days provided for in the legislation.
The centralised procedure would also be positive for small and medium-sized enterprises. Let us take the example of biotechnology. SMEs are very active in this field, where centralised authorisation is already mandatory. Experience has not brought any major problems to light.
The benefits of a centralised procedure for SMEs are obvious in areas such as orphan drugs, where most of the marketing authorisations are granted to SMEs. This said, the Commission could, with a view to an overall solution, seek supporting measures for SMEs if there are particular obstacles, to help SMEs overcome them.
Secondly, we need to find the right balance between innovation and competition from generics. Why is this so important? To put it in a nutshell, we need innovative products for the benefit of patients and we need generics to help reduce the pressure on health care costs.
How then are these needs to be balanced? For innovative medicines, the Commission proposes a new data-protection period. For generics, entry to the market will be speeded up. How will this happen? First, the Commission proposes to harmonise the national data protection periods at 10 years across the board. This will provide a harmonised solution for Europe. The protection period will give the innovative pharmaceutical industry an opportunity to recover its R& D investments. This will also allow for the smoother operation of the internal market. To reward further innovation and research in new products, the proposal provides for a possible extension of the protection period up to 11 years.
For generics, the Commission proposes to change a long-standing EU policy. We propose now, for the first time in EU legislation, that trials may begin on generics before the expiry of the patent or other form of intellectual property protection. This will speed up the marketing of generics on most of the national markets and will substantially help to increase competition.
The Commission believes that this is a balanced proposal. It takes account of the interests of the innovative European pharmaceutical industry, which is losing ground compared with the industry in the United States. It means fewer jobs and less research in Europe unless we do things differently. At the same time, it will facilitate the development of a competitive market in generics, and that means medicines at lower cost for European citizens.
Finally, I should like to say a few words about controlled access to information for patients. I knew this would be a difficult discussion, but, first of all, the Commission is not proposing an American type of direct advertising to patients. The discussions have concentrated to a large extent on the US model, but this is not our model.
The facts of the matter are that a lot of fragmented information is already available on the web, at least for English-speaking patients. This has two major drawbacks: firstly, it discriminates against non-English-speaking people and, secondly, it means that the information can be piecemeal and unreliable.
Our proposal is that European citizens should obtain information that has been validated by European regulatory authorities and that follows guidelines to be agreed between the Member States and the Commission. It is a prudent proposal. It is a European pilot project, and has nothing in common with the US model. The alternatives to what we have today are, on the one hand, the continuation of massive direct advising to patients via the web. We cannot change this situation by our legislation. The alternative is to enable patients to obtain sound information, validated by the competent European authorities, on medicines for a small number of diseases. I think that this second option increases both choice and security for European patients.
In conclusion, the Commission proposals aim to guarantee a high level of public health to European citizens, to increase, in a balanced way, the availability of innovative medicinal products and generic products and also to be ready for enlargement.
This is a challenging piece of legislation. I am looking forward to the debate in the House today and to continued cooperation with Parliament and the Council.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in examining the legislation before us, we need to consider whether more EU involvement is needed when it comes to approving innovative medicinal products, or whether the mutual recognition procedure is the best approach. In other words, do we want a more integrated internal market for medicinal products with a view to giving patients throughout Europe swifter access to new, safe and effective medicines, or is the idea that extremely complicated authorisation procedures should continue to keep new medicines out of patients' hands for as long as possible?
I would like to argue in favour of the wider registration of medical products with new active substances. This has advantages not only for patients, but also for companies, because they can market medicines more quickly than up to now and thus enhance their competitiveness. The support proposed for SMEs should compensate for the drawbacks of the centralised authorisation procedure, which do hit them. As I see it, legislation should focus on patients and their needs. That means that safety and the effectiveness of medical products must play a key role in the authorisation procedure.
The procedure must be transparent. Patients, doctors and companies alike must therefore have access to any information not covered by business secrecy protection. In future, comprehensive information on progress with the authorisation procedure, on clinical tests carried out and on side effects and the prices of medical products will be downloadable at any time from a public database.
In this connection, I regret that the Commission's information project on asthma, diabetes and AIDS did not receive the support of a majority of the committee. The Commission proposal was certainly ambiguous and gave rise to fears that advertising for prescription medicines was to be permitted. However, the committee's decision meant that an opportunity to improve patient information has been lost. I feel sure that this ought to be put right over the next few years.
Pharmacovigilance, that is to say monitoring and reporting of side effects, is important to the safety of a medical product. The obligation to report side effects and submit periodic reports to the authorisation authority ensures continuous comprehensive assessment of any given medical product. There is a very effective safety net in the field of pharmacovigilance. This makes it easier to ascertain side effects and makes it possible to act quickly in the event of a crisis. For these reasons it will be possible to dispense with the procedure for relicensing products every five years.
Another key aspect of reform is the plan to prepare the boards and committees of the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products for their future remits and for the enlargement of the EU. The structure of the EAEMP is intended to reflect that of the EU Food Safety Authority, with an open application procedure for the Management Board and the Executive Director. Anyone wishing to become a member of one of the agency's boards or committees should have a high degree of scientific expertise and must declare any relevant interests. In addition to the existing scientific committees, there will in future be a committee for herbal medicinal products with the same status. This will make voluntary central authorisation for herbal medicines possible, giving patients throughout Europe the option of using tried and tested herbal medicines.
In addition to health protection, which is important for patients, there is also the issue of competitiveness and innovation in Europe's pharmaceutical industry. The harmonisation of data exclusivity is certainly a step towards increased competitiveness. Under the present arrangements, data exclusivity in Europe ranges from six to ten years, and this is in urgent need of harmonisation. The 10-year-rule gives a signal to pharmaceutical companies to intensify research and market truly innovative products. However, it also gives a signal to generic drug manufacturers to use the Bolar provisions. As I see it, the Commission proposal is a successful attempt to strike a balance between the justifiable desire of pharmaceutical companies to protect their data and the need of public health systems to improve access to cost-effective generic drugs.
Preparatory work for the European Council in Brussels on 24-25 October
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparatory work for the European Council in Brussels on 24 and 25 October 2002.
- (DA) Mr President, I have been asked to make a statement entitled 'Preparation for the European Council meeting in Brussels on 24-25 October 2002'.
This meeting will play a central role in further work during the Danish Presidency. As we know, the agenda will be dominated by the important topic of enlargement and also, in this connection, the subject of Kaliningrad, in which the European Parliament has of course taken a great interest. The outcome of the meeting will be of great importance as regards the possibility of realising the common goal of concluding enlargement negotiations with up to 10 countries. Therefore, the important thing is for the European Council to reach as many decisions as possible, so that as little as possible remains to be done in Copenhagen. It is true that what remains could be really tough going.
At the European Council meeting, the Chairman of the Convention will inform the European Council of the status of the Convention's work, and the President of the European Parliament will also speak to the European Council. Let me start with the latter. The meeting with the President of Parliament has become an established tradition which I know is valued highly by Heads of State and Government in the European Council.
Bearing in mind the agenda before us, it will of course be particularly interesting to hear the views of the President of Parliament on the issues the Council will be discussing, that is, enlargement, and also the related subject of Kaliningrad, which I shall come back to. It is very convenient that the discussion with the President of Parliament is taking place immediately before the working meetings on enlargement and Kaliningrad. In addition to the contribution of the President of Parliament, it is of course our hope that the meeting, including the opportunity to exchange information and ideas for use in further work, will prove beneficial to the President of Parliament and Parliament as a whole.
I now wish to say a little about enlargement. It is strongly to be hoped that decisions will be taken in Brussels on a number of very important subjects that could pave the way for enlargement. It must be decided which of the candidate countries will be able to conclude accession negotiations this year. The starting point will be the Commission's progress reports on the individual candidate countries and the Commission's strategy paper on enlargement as a whole, which was presented on 9 October by Commissioner Verheugen, who is also present here. On the basis of a comprehensive evaluation of the progress of each individual candidate country, the Commission concludes that 10 countries will be able to meet all the criteria by the start of 2004, and on that basis it is recommended that accession negotiations be concluded as planned here this year. At its meeting in Copenhagen, the European Council will also discuss those candidate countries which are not expected to be able to conclude negotiations this year (Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey), with a view to making decisions on the further course of the accession process for these countries.
Decisions are also to be taken in Brussels on the outstanding issues in the accession negotiations in connection with the financial package. There was agreement on the institutional issues at the General Affairs Council yesterday, and the European Council will amongst other things lay down, as part of the financial package, the total amount to be allocated to enlargement, candidate countries' participation in the common agricultural policy, including their share of direct income support, and the total aid from the cohesion and structural funds to the candidate countries. The European Council should also take a decision on the matter of the net position of the candidate countries in relation to the EU budget, and agreement has been reached as to the basis for these calculations.
The debate on these subjects to date has shown that it will not be easy to reach agreement. The European Council in Seville concluded that the EU's positions concerning the outstanding, financially onerous, chapters will be presented to the candidate countries at the beginning of November. That means that the Brussels European Council must take decisions on these matters if the timetable laid down in Seville is to be met. The Danish Presidency will insist on this, and so the meeting must go on until a solution has been found. As I have said, we can expect it to be very difficult. It will require a willingness to compromise on the part of everyone concerned, but a solution must be found.
In addition, Kaliningrad will be discussed, and on this point, too, significant progress was made at yesterday's meeting in Luxembourg, from which both Mr Verheugen and myself have just returned. The matter was discussed in Seville: the Commission was asked to study the possibilities for an effective and flexible solution to the question of transit; a solution which would be in conformity with the acquis and would have the agreement of the candidate countries concerned. The Commission submitted its communication on 18 September. This has been discussed twice in the Council, and it was also discussed here in Parliament only last week, on 15 October. Together with the Commission, the Presidency has held a series of talks with Russia and consulted Lithuania, in particular, which is the candidate country most affected.
Over and above the principles on which the Seville mandate was based, the EU has emphasised Lithuania's sovereign right to control its borders and to reserve the right to refuse entry. Furthermore, it has been laid down that a solution must not hinder or delay Lithuania's full membership of Schengen. The Council has agreed to give Lithuania a guarantee in that respect, and ultimately the Council agrees that Lithuania must be compensated for any additional expense arising from a solution to the transit question.
Russia has pressed home its desire to obtain the right to visa-free transit by train through Lithuania. This is a solution which entails many problems of a technical, economic, legal and political nature. The EU has not, however, ruled out examining the possibility, and the Presidency will continue to work towards a solution which satisfies all parties to the greatest possible extent and can win the support of the European Council. The guidelines I mentioned here were followed at yesterday's General Affairs Council in Luxembourg. Agreement was reached yesterday on making the provision I referred to: that Lithuania must be able to become a member of Schengen at the same time as the other candidate countries if it wishes; and it does. This is the EU's position, and it seems to me, therefore, that the 15 governments have prepared themselves as well as possible for the discussions which are to take place at the European Council meeting in Brussels, and also for the subsequent talks with Russia which are to be conducted by the Presidency, and which will culminate in the EU-Russia Summit in Copenhagen in November.
On the subject of the Convention, the European Council, in conformity with the Laeken Declaration, will hear a report at the Brussels meeting from the Chairman of the Convention, Mr Giscard d'Estaing, on the progress which has been made with the Convention's work. Helping the work of the Convention along is an important ambition of the Presidency's. The Convention has got off to a good start, and has now moved on to the important analysis stage. The number of proposals is rising, the mounds of paper are growing, and it seems to me that we have been witness to an extremely exciting debate on the future of Europe, both in and around the Convention. It has been a pleasure to see the firm commitment on the part of the members of the Convention, not least those members hailing from Parliament, who had been armed to the teeth, and who have made a particularly deep mark on the debate.
In the shape of the Convention, we see for the first time - and in the full glare of publicity - something as extraordinary as a genuine debate across European borders. This is not something we are accustomed to. As a rule, European politicians aim their contributions to the European debate at the public in their own, rather than other, countries. That is not, however, the case where this debate on the future of Europe is concerned; and this, I believe, bodes well for our ambition to create European cooperation which is more democratic and has grass-roots support.
As will have been clear from my statement, we have an extensive and ambitious agenda for the Brussels Summit. It is my hope and belief that all the countries will now show the necessary willingness to compromise and help to take the important decisions which I have spoken of here; and I shall not, of course, conceal the fact that the questions that remain are particularly tough nuts to crack, and here I am of course speaking of the economy.
I would like to repeat and underline that the European Council is looking forward to hearing what the President of Parliament, Mr Cox, has to say and to exchanging views with him. The importance of Parliament to the enlargement process is undisputed. Speaking almost with one voice, Parliament said very early on, first in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and then in plenary, what was to be done. This has contributed to the momentum, the driving force, which means that the enlargement process cannot, we hope, be halted at the last minute. This is something for which, on behalf of the Presidency, I wish, moreover, to thank Parliament most warmly.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, now that the Irish have voted in favour of the Treaty of Nice, the last political barriers to ratification of the Treaty have been overcome and the way to enlargement is open. I congratulate the Irish people on their decision. It demonstrates their openness and sense of responsibility.
What is true for Ireland is true for us all. It is in all our interests that enlargement should proceed without delay. The forthcoming European Council in Brussels is therefore crucial. The debate will focus on our proposals regarding the ten candidate countries with which we recommend winding up negotiations by the end of the year. The date for the accession of Bulgaria and Romania and the next stage of Turkey's candidacy will also be discussed. The agenda will include the issue of Kaliningrad too. We may have the opportunity to review the international situation, focusing particularly on how best to continue combating terrorism in the light of the recent tragic events in Bali and the Philippines. We will also hear what the President of the European Convention has to report and we will hold our customary exchange of views with the President of the European Parliament.
The first item on the Council's agenda will therefore be enlargement. I would like to spell out once again the compelling reasons behind our recommendation to the Member States to conclude the negotiations with the ten countries. We have a historic and moral duty to share with our European neighbours the stability and prosperity we have built up over half a century of integration. Peace, stability, democracy and the rule of law are the essential ingredients for political stability. All this has worked very well for us in the past. It will work for the future Member States too.
Enlargement will extend European governance and standards to the entire continent. We expect to see a positive impact in very many areas: more efficient public administrations, more robust judicial systems, greater protection of minorities, more effective crime prevention, especially where cross-border crime is concerned, more stringent controls on illegal migration, enhanced monitoring of products on the market and, in particular, of food safety, and, lastly, stricter environmental standards.
The European Union's greater size will increase its political potential on the world stage. This will bolster our policies in the fields of trade, financial markets, the environment and security. Europe will be in a better position to defend human rights and to help reduce the North-South divide. If we succeed in uniting faithfully and speaking with a single voice, we will be able to make a difference in issues such as climate change and managing the impact of globalisation.
On top of that, however, the first wave of ten new Member countries will bring enormous economic benefits for the Union as a whole - for both current and future Member States. The increase in the Union's population will strengthen the single market: the population will be increased by approximately 75 - 77 million, bringing the total number of citizens in the Union to 453 million. By way of comparison, consider that NAFTA - comprising the United States, Mexico and Canada - has a population of around 400 million.
Some say that, after the ten candidate countries join the European Union, the Union's GDP will grow by only 4 or 5% while the population will increase by 20%. There is nothing negative in that. These statistics highlight the fact that we alone are achieving a process of democratic globalisation, even if only at regional level. They are by no means negative, for they are evidence of huge potential for growth, considering the trends displayed by these countries. Indeed, we must not forget that the ten candidate countries are already growing at a consistently higher rate than the present 15 Member States. Year on year, this was 2.4% in 2001 compared with 1.5% for the current European Union and a remarkable 4.1% in 2000 compared with our 3.4%. Most importantly, the ten candidate countries will bring highly qualified human resources to the Union. It is true that the enlargement countries will increase the Union's population by 20% and its income by only 5%, but the percentage of science and engineering students graduating in these countries each year corresponds to 25% of our total. This is a resource which will contribute greatly to the increase in development.
Interpreting all these factors intelligently, we see that the candidate countries are our new frontier. European industry will have new scope for development and expansion because there will be a great need for new technologies and because the new Member States will provide a market for our goods and services.
Ladies and gentlemen, those are the benefits enlargement will bring. It is now time to address the remaining problems. First, however, I would like to make one minor general point: we must take great care not to jeopardise the success of enlargement by wrangling over details, as often happens in political decision-making. The unification of Europe must always take precedence over narrow sectoral and national interests. We need to concentrate on the larger picture and never lose sight of the opportunities I have just described.
The ten countries have made enormous progress in recent years. The Commission's Regular Reports presented recently make this abundantly clear, and I want to emphasise that these analyses were neither overindulgent nor overoptimistic. The Commission's confidence in the candidate countries is based on facts and thorough analysis. The progress already made is the guarantee that all ten countries will be ready for membership in early 2004, including in those areas where the work undertaken still - of course - needs to be completed.
Nonetheless, despite our total confidence in the candidate countries, the Commission has undertaken to monitor their final preparations and progress even after accession. To this end, we have prepared safeguard clauses for the internal market and justice and home affairs, which are the areas with regard to which our citizens have the most fears and the least confidence. The safeguard clauses will take effect should pledges given not be respected - an extremely unlikely scenario but one which is still possible, and we must make provision for it.
As you are aware, the key points that will be on the table in the debate between the Heads of State and Government relate to the financing of enlargement. These last remaining issues are nonetheless highly significant. The issue that meets with the broadest agreement is net transfers. There is clear unanimity on two principles: firstly, on accession, the ten candidate countries must not find themselves in the position of net contributors; and secondly, all expenditure commitments must fall within the strict limits set at Berlin. We have adhered to these two principles, and I therefore believe that it will not be difficult to reach agreement on the exact figure at Copenhagen.
As regards the Structural Funds, too, there appears to be growing consensus on an annual figure of around EUR 25.5 billion for 2004, 2005 and 2006. Frankly, we can hardly offer our new fellow citizens less. It will mean that the per capita amount received by the cohesion countries - the existing countries - will be EUR 231 in 2006 while the citizens of the new Member States will be entitled to EUR 137 per capita. I do not think we can make the discrepancy any wider than this.
I would like, on behalf of the House to give a warm welcome to the delegation from New Zealand, who are led by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr Jonathan Hunt, and who are seated in the Distinguished Visitors' Gallery. Mr Speaker, we welcome you!
The delegation from New Zealand consists of five members of the country's House of Representatives. The Tenth Interparliamentary Conference between the European Parliament and New Zealand started yesterday and several meetings have already been held. Further meetings are scheduled for today. New Zealand and the European Union are closely joined together by common values, faith in democratic institutions and the decisive role played by parliamentary democracy. We are glad that you are visiting our House here in Strasbourg and hope that you will have good dialogues during your stay here and that the bonds of friendship between Europe and New Zealand will continue to flourish.
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0343/2002) by Mr Robert Goebbels on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Council common position (9359/6/2002 - C5-0384/2002 - 2001/0118(COD)) for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on insider dealing and market manipulation.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the directive on market abuses is important for several reasons. It is the first directive to be adopted under what is known as the Lamfalussy procedure. This is a piece of framework legislation that will be supplemented by implementing regulations. The Commission will pass this secondary legislation on the basis of proposals by the Committee of European Securities Regulators, known as CESR in English. The CESR will draft its proposals on the basis of broad public consultation. The Commission will also adopt the implementing regulations in a transparent way. The Ecofin Council and the European Parliament will monitor the Commission. Parliament will have a deadline of three months in which to deliver an opinion. If, within that period, Parliament adopts a resolution, the Commission will have to re-examine its draft measures. This, therefore, provides a guarantee that secondary legislation will be democratically monitored.
For the future, in order to provide the possibility both of giving secondary legislation more regulations of a technical nature and of providing colegislators with final decision-making rights, a 'call-back' procedure, amending Article 202 of the Treaty, absolutely must be provided for.
The aim of the directive is to lay down the same rules for all financial products throughout the Union, in order to combat all forms of insider dealing and market abuse.
At first reading, Parliament adopted 77 amendments. The Council accepted 60 of these in full and 10 in part. This is clearly a success for Parliament.
I wish to pay tribute to the Belgian, Spanish and Danish presidencies and to the Commission staff, who have always proved willing to reach workable compromises. I also address my thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, especially Mr Thomas Mann. Because the Commission and the Council have declared their agreement on the five amendments accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs following second reading, the directive could be implemented quite rapidly. The new rules will certainly help to restore confidence in the integrity of the financial markets.
Since the bursting of the speculative bubble over the stock markets and the financial scandals that have hit both the United States and Europe, many investors are hesitant. Since the beginning of 2000, more than USD 7 trillion of virtual stock exchange profits have also been wiped off the market. In Europe, several thousand billion euros have also gone up in smoke. This situation destabilises economies, penalises savers, weakens investment funds and lowers the value of pension funds.
In order to restore the confidence of investors and small savers in the financial markets, we must combat all forms of criminal connivance, forcing companies to be as transparent as possible. In recent months, we have seen numerous revelations about the pally form of capitalism operating amongst company directors, accounting companies, investment banks and financial analysts. This entire group, which on the surface, appears to be quite respectable, operated in such a way that it could milk stock market exuberance for their own profit.
As a result of the market's lack of transparency, there have been conflicts of interest within accounting firms. Many financial analysts have been both judge and accused. Auditors and analysts duped the market players that placed their trust in them. The reason for this was the practice of stock options and other personal bonuses to be received in line with the financial results of their employers.
The sums in question sometimes defy belief. One example is that the CEOs of the twenty-five largest American companies to have declared themselves bankrupt in the last 18 months had awarded themselves, in the three years preceding their company's bankruptcy, packages totalling around USD 3.3 billion. Although we should not generalise, the golden years of the financial sector have nevertheless led to a sort of 'financial mad cow disease' - the 'mad finance syndrome'. Just like the clean-up of the meat market, the need for and the establishment of a rigorous monitoring system and the clean-up of the financial markets will require precise rules to combat all insider dealing and all market manipulation.
The sole aim of the directive is to better regulate the financial markets. It is not seeking to regulate the profession of journalism. Unfortunately, some parts of the press, especially in the United Kingdom, have launched a sometimes incredible campaign against the Commission's proposals, suggesting that the very freedom of the press was at stake. The freedom of the press has not been in any danger and nor will it be. The first article clearly states that no journalist can be held responsible for disseminating false or misleading information, unless that journalist is gaining any advantage or profit from divulging such information.
I am starting from the premise that all journalists attempt to do their job correctly and that they check their sources. If a journalist is wrong, they will not be held responsible, unless he has touched money in the manipulation that has occurred. Some recent scandals, from the Daily Mirror to the Magazine des actionnaires, show that no profession is entirely honest. Parliament wishes to encourage the establishment of codes of good conduct and self-regulation for journalists, not least with regard to potential conflicts of interest, but the best form of self-regulation in the world will never exempt legislators from having to remain vigilant and from intervening at regulatory level if, perchance, self-regulation should prove to be inadequate or unworkable. This is why I ask you to reject the two strangely identical amendments tabled on this matter. It is simply unacceptable that a profession, even one as respectable as journalism, should attempt to exempt itself definitively from a European regulation that concerns it. Once again, it is not the CESR that will establish the rules but the Commission, under the democratic control of the Council and Parliament.
I can assure you, Mr President, that I shall be the first, and not the only one, to oppose any attack on the freedom of the press or against any unworkable over-regulation. European law must, however, be the same for everyone. Every democrat and, consequently, every journalist worthy of the name should welcome this crucial principle.
I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Goebbels, for all his efforts. As we all know, he has been working under heavy pressure. This is a very complex and sensitive issue. I applaud the fact that he has resolutely defended the aim of the directive, which is to enhance the integrity of European financial markets. I should also like to thank the shadow rapporteur and Members of this Parliament and, in particular, of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their readiness to proceed as quickly as possible.
After all the discussions we have had on comitology in the past, let me highlight the successful cooperation between our institutions in drawing up this directive, the first to apply the Lamfalussy approach in full. I believe that today's text will provide a good basis for effective cooperation between the European Commission and the European Parliament in the future. As Mr Goebbels knows, the Commission is in favour of amending Articles 202 and 211 of the Treaty to bring the positions of Parliament and the Council into line. I hope that will become even clearer in the contribution the Commission is preparing for the Convention, which, I hope, will be finalised by the end of November. Mr Goebbels, his colleagues and the Commission think alike on that topic.
I assure this Parliament that the European Union has no truck with greedy financial cheats - certainly not with the equivalent of financial mad cows, as Mr Goebbels called them. That is a very vivid phrase which the Commission finds very apt. We want stable, transparent, integrated and efficient European markets for every consumer and investor.
The directive will indeed enhance investor protection and make European financial markets more secure and attractive in future. It will dispel the international concerns expressed over the last few years about insider dealing and manipulation on European markets.
As we are all aware, recent events have shown how important these issues are. Scandals like Enron and other household names show clearly the need for strong rules to make markets more transparent and safe, to ensure that they remain free of abuse and free of fraud. The smooth functioning of financial markets and public confidence in them are essential to sustained economic growth and the creation of wealth. Abuse of markets leads to companies paying more for the finance they need; investors will stay away and the economy will suffer as a result.
We must do everything to stamp this out and to restore public confidence in our markets. The directive aims to do just that.
Since there has been an in-depth discussion about the application of the directive to journalists, which Mr Goebbels referred to, let me say a few words on that subject. Firstly, may I make it clear that under no circumstances do we want to add to the burdens of journalists. The directive does not do that. Journalism is a difficult profession; the pressure of work is great and we do not want to add to that. The directive guarantees freedom of expression and the liberty of the media. That is clearly expressed in the recitals, and the text of the directive itself introduces several safeguards for journalists, including the possibility of self-regulation.
However, recent scandals in several Member States have shown how recommendations by journalists to buy or sell a specific share can influence its market price to their advantage. What we do not want is to exempt from transparency obligations the small category of highly specialised financial journalists who recommend investment strategies. The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments 6 and 7. It would not seem justified to exempt this rather small category of persons from basic market integrity standards which apply to all the other market participants.
In addition, completely or partially excluding journalists from the scope of the directive would mean harmonising the definition of 'journalist' at Community level, not a very easy task and something we do not wish to do. Therefore, Amendment 5 is a compromise proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for today's plenary. It is fair both to journalists and to the public interest, and therefore acceptable. I strongly hope that Members of this Parliament share the view of Mr Goebbels and of the Commission on this point. After all, financial journalists who specifically recommend a certain strategy to the investing public should declare any conflict of interests they may have. I do not see why that should not be a useful aspect of this directive.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 24 October 2002.
On 31 October 2002, a violent earthquake hit the region of Molise in Italy which resulted in the destruction of some villages and claimed the lives of a number of people.
In particular the small town of San Giuliano di Puglia was destroyed and a school collapsed killing 29 people, 26 of whom were children. The entire primary class of children born in 1996 was killed under the rubble of that disaster. Many of the families are now left homeless with winter approaching.
All natural disasters and tragic events provoke in us a response of sympathy and kindred feeling for those who have suffered. On this occasion, however, throughout Europe and further afield, people were deeply touched at the tragic loss of the lives of so many young children.
On behalf of the European Parliament I have expressed our sympathy and condolences to the Mayor of San Giuliano di Puglia, to the President of the region of Molise and to the families of the victims. I invite you now to observe a minute's silence in their memory.
I also regret to inform the House that this morning a Luxair plane flying from Berlin to Luxembourg crashed in Niederanven on its approach to Luxembourg Airport, carrying 19 passengers and three crew. The initial reports suggest that as many as 17 people have died in this tragic accident.
Earlier this morning in France, a train en route from Paris to Vienna caught fire near Nancy. Twelve people lost their lives in this tragic accident. I would like to inform you that on my own behalf and in the name of the European Parliament, I have expressed to the Luxembourg and French authorities our solidarity with and deepest sympathy for the families of all those involved in these tragic accidents.
I would also like to inform the House that I have written a letter to the President of the Duma expressing our condemnation of the act of terrorism in the Doubrovka Theatre in Moscow where over 700 people were held hostage. I expressed our deep regret at the subsequent loss of life.
Mr President, I have just returned from a trip to the Mexican State of Jalisco, where I was an eyewitness to the devastating effects of a hurricane, particularly in Puerto Vallarta. Fortunately, thanks to the diligence of the local authorities, there have been no human casualties, but the material damage has been very considerable.
Mr President, I would be grateful if you could contact the Mexican authorities, the President of the Republic, who was here in our Parliament in May, and the Governor of the State of Jalisco, on behalf of this House, to express our solidarity with them in the face of these events.
I would also like to ask the Commission - and I am glad that its Vice-President is here - to study as carefully as possible how the European Union can respond with solidarity in the face of a disaster of this type, whether in the form of emergency aid or of reconstruction and rehabilitation, given that Mexico is a positive and active partner of the European Union and is linked to the Union by means of an Association Agreement and shares our system of values, as demonstrated recently on the issues of the death penalty, the International Criminal Court and the various debates that have been held recently within the United Nations.
Pursuant to Rule 111a I have received a request from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for the inclusion on the agenda of an extraordinary debate on the seizure of hostages in Moscow and its tragic ending, and on the war in Chechnya. Mr Solana will be making a contribution and will include a report on the EU-Russia Summit. This matter could be dealt with under this heading.
In the light of the horrific tragedy which occurred in Moscow and the horrific tragedy which has been going on for years in Chechnya, we feel it is necessary, on the eve of the EU-Russia Summit, in the presence of the Commission and of Mr Solana, to include a debate on Chechnya in our debates on foreign policy, as there are questions that we wish to raise with Russia regarding the massacres that have been carried out in Chechnya and regarding the lack of information Russian citizens were given following the horrific, tragic hostage-taking. We therefore call for this item to be officially placed on the agenda and to be raised during the debates with the Commission and Mr Solana.
Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I should like to say that we agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit that this topic is of key importance. However, our group does see the need for a thorough and somewhat more systematically-prepared debate to be held during the second November part-session, when we will be discussing relations between Europe and Russia. There is obviously, though, no objection at all to the dreadful events in Moscow being specifically mentioned in items 22 and 23 of the resolution on the results of the European Council and to the topic also being raised during the debate with Mr Solana. However, we consider it necessary for this topic to be discussed in a more structured way during the second November part-session, but as I said before, we have no objections at all to this point also being discussed in the debate on the results of the European Council and in this afternoon's debate with Mr Solana.
Mr President, on a point of order: I was somewhat astonished, at 1 p.m. this lunchtime, to learn of the existence of this application by the Greens. We are a democratic group, in which decisions are never taken by the chairman acting alone. I immediately sent an e-mail to the bureau and to the two co-ordinators, Philippe Morillon and Arie Oostlander, to the effect that we would support this application by the Greens subject to no objection being expressed to me. My dear Mr Cohn-Bendit, I would, however, ask you to ensure that, in future, our groups have the time to discuss such an issue in a democratic manner. In the absence of any objection from the bureau and the co-ordinators, our group is in favour of taking this topic and Mr Solana's statement together.
We are agreed therefore that we do not need a vote. The matter is simply going to be taken as part of the general debate on Mr Solana's report on foreign policy.
Mr President, a few days ago, in Northern Ireland, a young Irish catholic was crucified by Protestant activists. It seems incredible that a universal symbol such as the cross should be transformed into a hideous instrument of torture for political ends. This is a disgrace to Europe. I call upon the Presidency to express strong condemnation of a criminal action which goes against the most sacred values of our European civilisation, and not just in symbolic terms.
I certainly agree that it was a horrific attack and I will forward your request to the President.
The next item is the communication from the Commission on the package of proposals relating to nuclear energy: decommissioning and safety of reactors in the candidate countries, waste management and nuclear trade with Russia.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on completing the internal market.
I suggest we begin with the Commission. We shall now hear Mr Bolkestein.
Mr President, it is sometimes easy to forget what has been achieved since 1992. Many of us no doubt remember the sight of lorries being stopped at our internal borders, their loads inspected and paperwork stamped. The chances of winning a public procurement contract in another Member State were then about as high as winning the national lottery. Setting up a European banking or insurance network was virtually impossible because of different regulatory requirements.
The cost of a telephone call was extraordinarily high, and the quality of service was often poor. Cross-border banking fees were astronomical. Consumers simply got a bad deal. Our citizens were continually frustrated in their efforts to obtain residence permits to live in another Member State or to have their professional qualifications, for example as a doctor, recognised.
More competition and productivity gains have helped to create many new jobs that would not have been created without the internal market. The Commission will soon publish figures on the employment gains and growth effects of ten years of the internal market. These gains have been achieved even though important gaps remain within the legal framework.
We face a choice as we look towards the future. The choice is between an ever more dynamic internal market, which will remain an engine for more jobs and affluence in both the old and the new Member States, or an internal market which fires on only one or two of its cylinders, and which will be increasingly exposed to corrosive forces. If we choose the latter, we might just as well give up on our Lisbon objectives.
A decade ago, there was much steam behind the internal market programme. Today, there seems to be far less appetite for taking difficult political decisions. Even during the last two years, when times were good, we have accumulated a delivery gap.
The Community patent, COMPAT, is perhaps the best example. How can the Council seriously say that it wants Europe to become the most competitive economy in the world if it is not willing to adopt this critical measure for innovation and growth? The Competitiveness Council will have another go at resolving COMPAT's problems next week, but my patience is wearing thin.
We need to create an internal market worthy of the name also in services. The services sector constitutes a full 70% of all our economies and unfortunately it is still rife with barriers. Make no mistake, once we tackle these barriers, the vested interests will again make themselves known and call on Members of Parliament and ministers to defend the status quo. We shall need the Parliament's strongest support to overcome that resistance to change.
Some erosion has also slipped into our framework for the free movement of goods. Mutual recognition, one of the bases of the internal market, is not working as well as it ought to. National marking often acts as a hidden barrier to trade. In some important industrial sectors, there are not nearly enough European standards. These weaknesses in the foundations of the internal market will be exposed even more strongly after enlargement.
We need an integrated capital market that is capable of channelling today's savings into tomorrow's investments. We need to strengthen corporate governance, taking due account of the ideas expressed in the recent Winter Report of high-level company law experts chaired by Professor Jaap Winter. We must offer our companies the flexibility to organise themselves on a continental scale, including through takeover bids. We need to remove tax obstacles, which add unnecessarily to the costs of doing business. We need to open up further the network industries. We need to deal with the pension time bomb. We need better and simpler rules.
Rules need to be transposed on time and correctly. We talk about biotech as one of the growth sectors of the future of Europe. But only six Member States out of fifteen have now transposed the directive on the patentability of biotechnological inventions. This transposition was due 18 months ago, so nine Member States have stepped out of line and are lagging behind in this area. Overall, the transposition deficit for internal market directives is moving away again from the 1.5% target set by the European Council.
We have our work cut out. I know that none of this is easy. Taking decisions will probably become even more difficult in an enlarged European Union. There is a real risk that the delivery gap will grow wider unless we begin to act strategically by putting the European Union's long-term interests before narrow sectoral interests, which oppose change.
We have the strong support of our citizens and businesses. Next week, the Commission will publish the results of a major survey on ten years of the internal market. I can already tell you that the survey shows that 77% of our citizens and 84% of our businesses feel that the internal market has been a very positive force in their lives. They want the internal market to serve them even better in the future.
At the level of the Parliament, the Commission is eagerly awaiting the forthcoming report on the internal market strategy, for which Mr Harbour is the rapporteur. I expect the report to be ambitious and hard-hitting. The recent creation of the Competitiveness Council also represents a welcome opportunity to make progress.
Ten years after the removal of our internal borders, one year into the euro, and on the eve of enlargement, now is the time for a major new push to improve the internal market. I count on the Council's and Parliament's support to work towards an ambitious medium-term internal market strategy, which the Commission aims to present by next April. If we act decisively, the best is yet to come.
- (DA) Mr President, Commissioner, it is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to discuss the state of affairs regarding the internal market, and the impetus behind it, with the European Parliament. I am sorry that I was a little late.
The EU is currently facing great challenges. We have to manage the forthcoming enlargement by ten new Member States, and at the same time we still have to carry out a number of reforms in order that the EU is able to function as an economically robust global player.
As President-in-Office of the Council, I have chosen to discuss the state of affairs regarding the completion of the internal market with you today, as I consider it crucial that we have a true internal market encompassing all of the new countries, and, at the same time, an economy which can compete at external level: in the spirit of the ambitious Lisbon vision. The European Parliament of today is a major co-legislator in matters concerning the development of the internal market. As President of the Competitiveness Council, therefore, I feel that this is a natural and particularly necessary topic for discussion with Parliament today.
It is 15 years since the idea of an internal market was put on the agenda. It is nearly ten years since the wheels were set in motion. The internal market is one of the most ambitious goals ever set in the history of the EU. In the sectors in which we have reached our goals, the benefits for European consumers and businesses have been tremendous. The internal market has brought more and better products at lower prices, freedom of movement across borders, and especially an increase in competitiveness. At the same time, however, we note that there are unfortunately still many difficult issues that need to be resolved before the internal market is complete.
The Danish Presidency has chosen to accord this area top priority. This is firstly because a fully operational internal market is a key element in the EU's competitiveness, economic growth and employment. Secondly, the development of technologies and markets necessitates the removal of the remaining barriers to cross-border trade. Thirdly, increased economic globalisation requires swifter action on structural reforms. It is of crucial importance to have product and capital markets which function well.
The internal market must be able to deliver what our citizens expect of it: a wide selection of products and services that are of high quality, safe, and reasonably priced; and also freedom of movement across internal borders without unnecessary red tape.
The forthcoming enlargement is vital. The candidate countries are working hard in order to be ready for accession. I am fully confident that they will do their utmost to cope with the legislation we have adopted over many years, and it is our responsibility to assist them as best we can - even after their accession.
There is great potential in a newly enlarged internal market - for both citizens and businesses. An internal market with 100 million more consumers in fast-growing economies will mean faster economic growth and more jobs in both the present and the future Member States. A 2001 study by the Commission shows that enlargement will lead to an increase in the candidate countries' GDP of between 1.3% and 2.1% per annum. For the existing members, the overall increase in GDP will be 0.7%. The growth potential of the forthcoming enlargement will depend on whether we can push through the structural reforms which are still lacking.
One of the greatest challenges we face is the completion of the internal market in the areas in which it is not functioning as intended.
The services sector is vital to European growth: two out of three jobs are in this sector, and the private and public service industries account for 70% of EU GDP. The Commission's report on barriers in the internal market for services shows that there are many barriers of both a legislative and a non-legislative nature. We must find a solution to this. As soon as the Commission has submitted its proposals, the Council and Parliament must consider how the remaining barriers can be removed as quickly as possible.
The internal market for financial services is also extremely important. In the face of global financial markets, regulation must take place at EU level. The economic benefits of the implementation of the Financial Services Action Plan have been analysed by the so-called 'Gyllenhammer group', amongst others. The analysis suggests that financial integration will bring about an annual increase in growth of up to half a per cent of GDP. I note with pleasure that 30 proposals have now been adopted, including four of the eight proposals mentioned in the conclusions from the European Council meeting in Barcelona.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 7 November 2002.
The final draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 14 November 2002 pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of Parliament's Rules of Procedure, has been distributed.
Mr President, you must be aware that it is very foggy around Strasbourg and I have been told that many Members are not here. Some of them regret that they will be unable to participate in the debate on the Medina Ortega report on tobacco sponsorship and advertising. I would ask you to consider postponing that debate until later tonight. I have been told that a bus is bringing people from Brussels and is expected to arrive about 8.30 p.m. Mrs Malliori, the draftsperson of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, is on that bus and it would be regrettable if she were not here for the debate.
I do not want to get involved in the matter of the weather now but we may return to it later.
Mr President, this matter concerns the agenda in general - I do not know if it affects Monday. As you are aware, the Prestige, failing to live up to its name, spilt several tonnes of oil off the Spanish coast, which not only created an oil slick more than 200 kilometres long, but is also a source of great environmental concern and great economic concern for the families affected, which number over 5 000.
Therefore, Mr President, as I understand that Parliament must be sensitive to our citizens' concerns, I would ask you to include in our agenda a Commission statement, followed by a debate, so that we can examine the circumstances in which this incident took place, the causes, the measures that the European Union needs to take in order to prevent a recurrence and possible terms for European Union solidarity.
Mr President, I do not know whether this can be done on Monday or on Thursday, due to the Commission statement on climate change, but I would like to establish it clearly now, so that if the rest of the political groups agree, we can include it in our agenda.
I am trying to work my way systematically through our week. You have anticipated something which your group and other groups proposed for a change to Thursday's agenda. I ask any colleagues wishing to speak on that matter to hold their comments until we deal with Thursday's agenda. But I take note of your request.
Mr President, I understand Mrs Hautala's point of view and I would like the maximum possible number of Members to take part in the debate, but Mrs Hautala's proposal does not seem relevant because, at the moment, it would appear that many of our fellow Members are on their way here by bus. We do not know when they will arrive and when they arrive they will probably be absolutely exhausted. You do not even know whether they are going to take part in this debate. If the proposal was for the debate to take place tomorrow, I would agree, but leaving it until last today, when these poor people do not even know what they are going to do, does not seem appropriate to me. I therefore believe we should either hold the debate now or leave it for another day this week.
Tomorrow is absolutely impossible. It already looks close to impossible even without adding another report. Listening to the rapporteur, and in the light of the fact that requests of this sort must be placed with the services one full hour before the sitting, it seems to me it is best to proceed.
I do, however, express my regret that Mrs Hautala and we as a Parliament should today find ourselves in this position of being unable to assure the attendance of colleagues who set off early enough in the day to expect to be able to contribute to a debate.
Mr President, I understand the reasons you have just given, but, as Mrs Hautala said, Mrs Malliori is the draftsperson for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy in this highly important debate on the advertising of tobacco and, as you are well aware, Mr President, issues relating to tobacco advertising are always controversial and there are differences of opinion between the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market. That is why Mrs Hautala was asking to postpone the report for a while to allow the other Members to arrive. I do not know whether this is impossible, but, of course, if the rapporteur does not agree ? I understand the problem, but it would be important for Parliament if Mrs Malliori were present, since she is the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on this matter.
I do not want to continue the debate unnecessarily and I fully appreciate the difficulty. The main rapporteur has suggested today or tomorrow. There, we have no choice: today is the only option. However, I do accept that perspectives can be different across committees. In the light of the exceptional circumstances and the absence of the draftsman, Mrs Malliori, I would invite the Environment Committee to ensure that someone who has attended the debates and voted on the Committee is available to give a reasonable account of the Committee's view during the debate this evening.
Mr President, I notice that in today's agenda there are five or six oral questions in a debate on media concentration, and I believe almost all of us who are due to speak are here.
I have just seen that the Commission is present. If Mr Byrne is the Commissioner due to respond to this question, I propose we begin with this subject and then consider the Medina Ortega report afterwards. Perhaps that could be a reasonable solution.
Looking at colleagues' reactions, that seems to me to be an acceptable suggestion. We will therefore begin today's sitting with the joint debate on media. We will follow that debate with the Medina Ortega report and with the opinion that should accompany it.
As regards the Council statement on the tripartite social summit, the Council has asked that this be brought forward on Wednesday's agenda and entered immediately after the statement on Pakistan.
I have received from the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance a request to include in the agenda for this part-session a Commission statement on the application of the Erika package on maritime safety to the wreck of the oil tanker off the Galician coast and the measures to be taken to alleviate the socio-economic and ecological disasters caused.
Mr President, I was scheduled yesterday to speak in the debate on the media but, unfortunately, because of problems getting to Strasbourg, I was unable to make my timeslot. I simply want to say that coming from the United Kingdom - renowned for its fogs, not to say for its smogs - I can in no way criticise the climate of Strasbourg. Indeed, I want to congratulate and thank the airport staff for putting safety first. I simply want to apologise to the presidency and to the House for missing my timeslot. I had left my home at 6 a.m. in a brave attempt to be here.
In addition to your comments, which will go on the record, I would point out that you have the opportunity under Rule 120(7) to make a written statement that will be appended to verbatim report of the debate in question.
The next item is the report (A5-0371/2002) by Elmar Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on enlargement: progress report (COM(2002) 700 - C5-0474/2002 - 2002/2160(INI)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, since we have had the historical dimension vividly presented to us this morning, I would like to start by referring to the immense efforts that the candidates for accession have put into completing the process of transformation. I believe that there was in many of these countries a politically courageous attitude, with a willingness to have recourse to unpopular courses of action that were bound to bring about change in their political, economic and social systems. Such measures would in any case have had to be implemented over wide areas, but they were also connected with membership of the European Union. I believe that our own political work has something to gain from such courage and capacity for making an impact.
I would also like, at the same time, to take this opportunity to thank the parties to the negotiations - the Council, the Commission in particular and the candidate countries, which have, over the past few years, taken upon themselves an incalculable amount of work in order to slowly steer this endeavour to a positive outcome. It must be clear to us, however, that there is still a range of things in this process that need to be put in order. For example, there are still a number of weighty issues remaining to be resolved before Copenhagen, or which will still require adjustments to be made in the ensuing process. By this I mean not only adherence to the transitional arrangements, which must of course be limited in time, but also the issues that we take up in our reports and which have to do with capacity deficits in the administration and justice systems, as well as with minority rights, corruption and trafficking in human beings. These are examples of problems that should be decisively tackled before enlargement becomes effective. I therefore believe that the Commission is taking the right line in concentrating pre-accession aid on these areas in order thereby to create the conditions required by May 2004.
I agree with you that we still have much to do even after these things have been achieved by all parties. We in this Parliament are prepared to make our contribution by keeping to the timetable. It was this House that decided that enlargement should go ahead so that these countries might be able to take part in the 2004 European elections, and in doing so it set a date that the others have adopted. When the accession treaty, amounting to some 6000 pages, is in place, we want to ensure that we can come to our decision by the beginning of April at the latest, so that the planned deadline for signature can be met and so that we can keep to the timetable, according to which ratification is to take place in mid-2004.
There are a number of very tangible issues that will need to be addressed in the course of negotiations. I refer to structural grants and agriculture. I would like again to emphasise that I trust in the wisdom of all the parties to the negotiations, and that these will be conducted in such a format as to make it possible to credibly present the outcome as a success, preventing us from ending up being foiled, in some referendum or other, by things that are trivialities in comparison with the historical dimension. I believe that we must not lose sight of that or be less than fully aware of our responsibilities, and take the view that we will be called on to give further support over the coming weeks. That also means that we have to seriously consider whether, for example, we want to inject a disproportionate amount of money - something that is not going to increase in quantity before 2006 - in the form of direct grants, or whether it might not be better to take a macroeconomic approach and put it into rural development as a whole. That is simply a question that I am throwing out into the room for the benefit of these countries.
I am convinced that we will also succeed in bringing the Kaliningrad issue to a conclusion. I hope that all the disputes surrounding the negotiations will be brought to an end and that the Commission and the Council will soon be able to explain in definite terms what is meant by the 'travel document light'. The one thing that is clear is the position of the European Parliament: we have to build bridges with Russia, but it must be made clear that Lithuania will become a Member State of the European Union without reservation, that we consider the interests of a small sovereign state, and that we will not accept any solution that impedes, hampers or delays Lithuania's entry into the Schengen system.
I see this as an important pointer to the coming weeks. I hope that the results of previous negotiations will serve as a basis on which everything will run smoothly.
I also wish to make clear that both the countries with which no conclusion is as yet in sight must be able to rely - if they complete the negotiations and fulfil the conditions - on us not discovering a new veto and a new alibi and shutting the door on them. This should also serve to reassure such countries as Bulgaria and Romania.
I hope that the Cyprus issue can be resolved on the basis of Kofi Annan's proposal, which I believe to be an important step forward in terms of the European Union's internal and external relations and also of the establishment of peace in the Mediterranean, quite independent of accession and EU enlargement, but connected with it. I do think, however, that the achievement of something as self-evident as this must not go hand in hand with watering down the Copenhagen political criteria in order to gain a political trade-off.
It will be after Copenhagen that the public will realise that we are taking the first step with ten countries seriously, and that a wide-ranging discussion will ensue in the present Member States of the European Union as to how much further we should go. We will then be able to put a credible case for that only if we say that any further enlargement of the European Union would be acceptable only on the basis of full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria, both political and economic. I believe that the credibility of the entire process depends on this.
It is for the avoidance of any misunderstanding that I tell you that, if Turkey fulfils these conditions, which at present include compliance with the European Union's Charter of Fundamental Rights, and if this forms an integral part of a political development in Turkey, with the armed forces no longer having a political role there, and the rule of law being established in full, then Turkey will have undergone a dramatic change, and we will then have to give sympathetic reconsideration to the possibility of Turkey acceding. Whether it will get there I do not know, but we should give it the chance. That is why it is the political criteria that are crucial here.
Mr President, we are now approaching the crucial date. In 23 days' time in Copenhagen, we shall hopefully conclude the accession negotiations with 10 candidate countries, give impetus to the negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania and take a decision about the next phase of Turkey's candidacy. In that way, we shall approach the objective towards which we have been striving, namely a single, reunified Europe.
That is something which, today, we have anticipated. We have carried out a trial run, and it emerged that having such a large Parliament with MEPs from 27 countries present here in Parliament is perfectly possible, as is the task of interpreting into 23 languages, as has been done. Many doubters must now recognise that these things are perfectly possible.
It was an historic event we experienced this morning, and I think Parliament deserves to be applauded for having in this way demonstrated what we shall all be embarking upon in a year and a half's time, as well as for having demonstrated that the process is feasible and for having in this way helped make the whole process irrevocable, so that there is no way back.
Yesterday was also historic in a way, however. Yesterday, a ministerial meeting was, for the first time, held in Brussels with the participation of all 25 Member States. It was, of course, an informal meeting. It took place directly before the ordinary meeting of the General Affairs Council, and what we decided was of course what we had discussed with the new Member States. We agreed, for example, that the new countries should accede on 1 May 2004. That will provide time for the ratification of the accession treaty and, at the same time, enable the new Member States to participate on an equal footing in the elections to the European Parliament. It was also agreed that they will be able to have their own Commissioners in the present Commission as from the date of accession, that is to say from 1 May 2004. This naturally presupposes an understanding with this Parliament to the effect that 10 Commissioners will be able to accede without portfolios and, presumably, without being approved by Parliament, its being specified however that, when the new Commission is appointed, presumably as per 1 November, all the Commissioners will naturally have, as always, to be approved by Parliament, which by that time will have been newly elected.
We must particularly express our thanks, and demonstrate our respect, for the candidate countries' contributions. They have done an impressive piece of work in adjusting to all the criteria we have set. That, as I understand it, is also the message of the report we are today debating. The Copenhagen criteria have been the yardstick for measuring the countries' political and economic reforms. Radical reforms have been carried out. Democratic structures have been developed. Legislation has been introduced to protect human rights, and major progress has been made where minorities are concerned. In the economic sphere, there has been an impressive transition from the planned economies of the past to market economies. Price formation has been liberalised, privatisations have been carried out and there has been comprehensive restructuring within industry, agriculture and the financial sector. Public administration has been reformed so that the EU's acquis communautaire can be implemented.
When one considers how much effort has been expended in every single one of these areas, one cannot help but admire the candidate countries. That is why we must not disappoint their justified expectations of now shortly being able to become fully-fledged members. This impressive progress can be read about in the Commission's progress report and strategy paper for enlargement, submitted on 9 October. These described all 10 countries, and the Commission judged that the latter are ready to pursue membership.
Before they become Member States, however, further efforts are of course required. The Commission has not said that the work has been done and that they are ready. It has said that they can be ready in time. As a reaction to the Commission's progress reports, the candidate countries have clearly intimated that they will step up their efforts in those areas pointed out by the Commission, and these efforts will be supported with EU funds.
Some work remains to be done in the accession negotiations. The Brussels European Council took a number of important decisions concerning the outstanding financial issues. Intense negotiations are currently being conducted with the candidate countries on these matters. Clearly, moreover, a successful outcome demands both effort and a willingness to compromise on the part of everyone involved - the present, as well as the future, Member States. We are all aware that a certain economic framework has been set, but there is naturally room for negotiation within this framework.
The concluding of the negotiations in Copenhagen in 23 days' time will be an incredible breakthrough. There will then follow the work of preparation, signature and ratification. Parliament will have to give its consent before the treaty can be signed, and Parliament's statement to the effect that it wishes to approve the treaty as quickly as possible merely illustrates once again Parliament's role as a driving force for rapid enlargement.
The next item is the Commission statement on the annual legislative and work programme for 2003.
Mr President, honourable Members. Today's sitting winds up two very special days here in Strasbourg. Yesterday we discussed enlargement and I confess the occasion was moving and gratifying. Today, in the presence of the full Commission I am here to present our legislative and work programme for the coming year.
This year the programme bears witness to a new method. In line with our agreement of last January, the main EU institutions have set up a structured political dialogue.
Over the last few months, all Members of the Commission have been available to discuss the Commission's priorities in their areas of responsibility before the relevant parliamentary committees.
I would emphasise that the Commission sets much store by Parliament's valuable contribution to this process.
This being the first year of application, there is of course room for improvement. This year's experience will help us improve in the future. But the results so far are very encouraging.
Let me mention the major innovations of the working method the Commission followed this year.
First, this Work Programme must be seen as a big step towards a more highly integrated and coherent planning process for the EU as a whole. So it is also intended as an important contribution to the Council's first annual operating programme as decided at the Seville European Council.
For the first time the programme sets out not only our new proposals but also the main proposals already adopted by the Commission and still to be considered by the Council. This will allow Parliament to take part too in planning this vital aspect of legislative work. The Commission hopes that the three main institutions can reach an agreement on the interinstitutional dimension of this planning process by the end of the year.
Secondly, our new working method is not based solely on interinstitutional dialogue but also on a constant exchange of information during the operational phase and on more transparency for the public.
In 2003 the Commission will send Parliament and the Council regular monthly updates of its operational planning. This will take the form of a three-monthly rolling programme giving ample information on proposals adopted.
The public will be able to follow all stages of the dialogue step by step since the documents forwarded will be accessible via our web pages.
Better coordination between the institutions, enhanced planning of legislative work and more information for the public are tangible proof of our determination to make the EU institutions more efficient and to give them a sounder democratic basis.
This shows we are putting into practice the guidelines set out in last year's White Paper on European Governance. These are not just technical innovations, but a vital step forward in the development of our integration project.
As I said yesterday, our main challenge for the coming year will be enlargement once more. So it is naturally our top priority for 2003.
These priorities have already been endorsed by the Council and this Assembly. I will now look at how the Commission intends implementing them next year.
We spoke extensively of enlargement yesterday. Today I simply want to stress the Commission's commitment to ensure that all parties involved in the process are capable of meeting their responsibilities from day one of accession.
The candidate countries must have carried over into national law and be actually implementing the body of Community legislation. This process has been going on for years now and it has produced excellent results, but the final phase needs to be monitored with special care.
For our part, I must stress how urgent it is to overhaul the EU's architecture so it can meet the challenges of 2004. There is a qualitative dimension to enlargement that must not be underestimated.
I rely on the wisdom of the Convention that is still in progress and on the Intergovernmental Conference that will be turning its recommendations into a genuine constitutional text for the EU.
The next item is the report (A5-0364/2002) by Mrs van den Burg, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the European Investment Bank annual report for 2001 [2001/2256(INI)].
Before giving the rapporteur the floor, I would like to welcome Mr Maystadt, President of the European Investment Bank, who will speak later on.
Madam President, let me first start with a word of welcome, also to Mr Maystadt. I should also like to thank the EIB for the fruitful cooperation which, in the tradition of the past three years, has developed as we have commented on your annual reports. I think that Parliament can be pleased with the way in which you have taken on board the suggestions from those previous reports, and I hope that this will also be the case with my report.
In your introduction to your 2001 annual report, you described the EIB as a policy-driven public bank whose mission is to help achieve economic, social and, ultimately, political goals. I could not agree with you more. The EIB can play an important macro-economic role and underpin EU policy in key areas. The EIB is a public bank, accountable to the public for the policy it pursues. It is with these considerations in mind that I have written my report and I have emphasised a number of aspects in this respect. Today, I should like to single out five elements from my report.
They are: capital increase, pension funds, labour market policy and employment policy, EU enlargement and adequate supervision of EIB policy.
First of all, capital increase. In its annual meeting of 4 June, the Board of Governors decided to increase the capital by EUR 50 billion. Parliament welcomes this decision and believes that funding this capital increase from the bank itself is a wise decision. We condemn, however, the Board's refusal to agree at this stage to a further increase in the next five years. Parliament also applauds the decision to increase the funding of some projects in the sectors hardest hit by the economic slow-down from 50% to 70% of the total project budget. I should also like to draw your attention to the facility which the EIB offered during the autumn floods in Central and Eastern Europe to bolster emergency programmes to as much as 100%. I think that this fits in well with the image of an active bank which supports the EU's goals. In that way, the EIB also becomes visible to the citizens.
I should next like to turn to the subject of pension funds. In my report, I enlarged upon the role of the bank as borrower on the capital markets. The EIB plays a major role in this area too, particularly on relatively new markets, such as in some accession countries. With its triple-A rating and long-term bonds in different currencies, the bank is a major protagonist and a very safe investment for pension funds, for example. A drawback is that EIB bonds are not always freely accessible. Government restrictions often apply precisely to investments made by pension funds and insurance companies. The EIB can play the role of icebreaker in order to promote long-term investments and, as a result, give investors more scope for riskier investments in their new economies. For example, the EIB could be an interesting partner for pension funds. This is why I tabled one more amendment before the plenary's debate on my report, and I should like to invite the bank to play an active part. I should also like to hear Mr Maystadt's opinion on the matter.
My third point concerns labour market policy. The Amsterdam action programme has been more effective in drawing attention to projects in the social sectors. Since time immemorial, the majority of investments have been in the area of hard infrastructure. It is, however, also important to invest in social infrastructure. I would apply the two-pronged Lisbon objective, both economically and socially, to EIB policy. Like last year, Parliament calls on the EIB to assess the impact on employment of the projects and activities implemented and supported by the EIB and to enhance the internal and external expertise in this field within all the bank's different activities and directorates. I am interested what Mr Maystadt's intentions are in this area too.
With regard to enlargement, we discussed the first round of the EU's enlargement in Parliament on Tuesday. The EIB can also do its bit by giving a high priority to activities in the accession countries and by allowing those countries to take part as fully-fledged participants. I have a feeling that the new Member States take too little advantage of investment opportunities. It seems as if they are imposing restrictions on themselves because they do not want to run up excessive debts. A creditable ambition which can bring them closer to monetary union, but something against which I would put question marks at this stage. Parliament has advised the EIB at any rate not to overlook the social dimension and to set up a special programme for the candidate countries and other partner countries, which should address the objectives of social cohesion. Mr Maystadt may be able to enlarge on this point too in his response.
Finally, Parliament urges an intensified co-operation of the EIB and the EBRD on the basis of a well-considered and efficient division of tasks. In fact, this will be discussed in a separate report by Mr Markov in our committee and in this House in the foreseeable future.
My final point concerns monitoring. The importance of transparency and of the adequate supervision of the EIB group is something that has always enjoyed Parliament's undivided attention. As a public investment bank, the need for adequate monitoring is obvious, but there is still room for improvement in this respect. This is largely due to the EIB's dual position as, on the one hand, originally a tax-funded public institution and on the other hand, a normal bank which, in the case of the EIF, which also forms part of the group, is also a venture capital fund. As financial institutions, they are not subject to the normal prudential supervision that is set up for other institutions at national level. This monitoring at national level was the subject of a report which I supported here yesterday. I think that this can also play a part in the case of the EIB.
A final point concerns the recommendations tabled by the Committee on Budgetary Control and I shall leave Mr Sjstedt to put the case for these. I have given almost all of them comprehensive coverage in my report.
Madam President, President Maystadt, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the European Parliament for having once again taken the initiative of organising a debate on the work of the EIB. I would congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs van den Burg, on her extremely interesting and comprehensive report which emphasises the EIB's role as the Community's primary long-term financing institution for key sectors of the European Union, the candidate countries and other partner countries.
I would briefly like to consider the following four points: collaboration between the EIB and the Commission, the EIB's work in the partner countries, the EIB's work in the candidate countries, and the Tripartite Agreement between the EIB, the Court of Auditors and the Commission.
The first point: the EIB is a policy driven public bank. Its task, as President Maystadt himself pointed out, is to contribute to the achievement of the political goals of the European Union in cooperation with the Commission. In this respect, the Commission warmly welcomes the growing cooperation with the Bank in various priority sectors such as regional development and the environment, and also areas addressed by the 'Innovation 2000 initiative' such as research and development, the audiovisual sector and information technology.
The Commission supports the EIB Group's consolidation of its activities concerning SMEs. It agrees with the European Parliament's point of view whereby the Bank should adopt the Commission's definition of SMEs.
The Commission acknowledges Parliament's wish to evaluate the impact on SMEs of the 'Multiannual Programme 2001 - 2005 on small and medium-sized enterprises', known as the MAP. In this respect, the Commission intends to draw up an interim progress report on the MAP in 2003, including its impact on SMEs, as required by the Council decision on the MAP. Furthermore, again as required by the same decision, the Commission will submit an external assessment report to the Council and Parliament by the end of December 2004.
The second point: the EIB has increased its financing activities in partner countries, working in close cooperation with the Commission. In this context, the Mediterranean Investment and Partnership Facility, launched in Barcelona last October, will constitute an important initiative to boost economic development in bordering countries in the south. The Commission has given substantial backing to this initiative, pledging EUR 255 million of the Community budget over the next four years. Moreover, the EIB, again in conjunction with the Commission, is preparing to implement the new investment fund for ACP countries laid down by the Cotonou Agreement. As regards the Balkans, the Commission and the Bank are currently looking into the possibility of granting the Bank a mandate to operate in Kosovo.
The third point: with regard to the EIB's work in the candidate countries, the Commission endorses Parliament's view that absolute priority must be given to the Bank's activities in these countries. We believe that the funding requirements are considerable and that the EIB and the EBRD must work closely together in order to contribute to the growth of the new Member States of the European Union.
With regard to the integration of the candidate countries into the EIB structure, the Commission is pleased to note that the Member States have, at last, reached an agreement on amendments to the Treaty with regard to the governance of the EIB and on its subscribed capital following accession. Once the agreement of the candidate countries has been obtained, this will enable the new Member States to be integrated into the EIB structure immediately after accession.
Lastly, the fourth and final point: a very brief comment on the Tripartite Agreement between the EIB, the Court of Auditors and the Commission. The Commission feels that the basic principles of the Tripartite Agreement reflect a fair balance between the rights of the Court of Auditors and those of the EIB, and that these principles must not be altered. As for the Community budget, in accordance with the Tripartite Agreement, the Court has access to a wide range of information about the Bank's operations under mandate and is entitled to additional information whenever it so desires. The Commission warmly welcomes Parliament's initiative calling on the interested parties to review the agreement, an initiative which will doubtless constitute an opportunity to update a number of technical and administrative aspects in the light of changes which have taken place.
Madam President, I want to say a few words about the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding this report. My committee and I are grateful for the fact that the rapporteur and the committee responsible have chosen to take on board so many of the views we have presented. Thank you very much.
The European Investment Bank has for many years been one of the EU's more anonymous powers that be. At the same time, the EIB has very great influence by virtue of the extensive loans both to the Member States and to the candidate countries. It would be sensible to have a more comprehensive political debate on the bank's approach and also more comprehensive scrutiny of the bank's activities on the part of the other EU institutions.
The reason for the European Investment Bank's having been a fairly anonymous wielder of power in the EU is no doubt the special status of this body. It is a bank which, moreover, is basically owned by the Member States, at the same time as being a part of the European Union. We suggest, partly by means of the following proposals, that it be scrutinised more carefully.
We wish to increase the Court of Auditors' access to information from the European Investment Bank. In the long run, this access to information should be similar to the access that exists to information from the European Central Bank. This is something that can be brought about through the tripartite agreement, which is subject to future review.
We should like to see increased cooperation between our committee, the Committee on Budgetary Control and the European Investment Bank. It should, for example, be possible to welcome the chairman of the bank to our meetings. We should also like to acquaint ourselves with more documents concerning the European Investment Bank's internal audit.
Mr President, I should like to make a brief statement on an incident which occurred this morning at our group meeting. This particular group invited Mrs Andreassen to come and give evidence to us on a matter of technical information about the accounting systems. We found much to our surprise that when we arrived, she had been gagged by the Commission and was not allowed to give any information to either the assembled parliamentarians or the press present.
What a clear majority of our political group would like to ask is whether the Commission can justify under what grounds Mrs Andreassen was gagged from giving us technical information about a substantive item which we need to know about. Perhaps more importantly, how is it that the framework agreement between the Commission and the Parliament does not now allow us as parliamentarians to talk to people about technical matters and how far, therefore, does the Commission reach into our institution? That is for our Bureau to decide and we would like to have clarity on that issue.
It is a matter for the Conference of Presidents and not the Bureau. But Mrs Schreyer is speaking later, if you wish her to deal with this matter then she may - it will be entirely up to her.
Mr President, I have a request to put to the Presidency. If my information is correct, the European Parliament has invited all the previous winners of the Sakharov Prize to Strasbourg to attend the parliamentary sitting.
Would the Presidency of Parliament send an official letter to the Turkish Government to ask them to issue a special pass to Mrs Zana ?
You have the honour of sitting on the Conference of Presidents and that is a matter for the Conference of Presidents. You can write to the President. I am sure you can pick up the telephone and speak to him.
The next item is the debate on the Annual Report of the Court of Auditors for 2001.
Mr President, Secretary-General, ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be able to present to you today the Annual Report of the European Court of Auditors for 2001.
I have organised my comments into four main sections: firstly, the analysis of budgetary management; secondly, the follow-up given to the Court's previous observations; thirdly, the Statement of Assurance (DAS); and fourthly, the reform of the Commission.
Let us begin with the analysis of the implementation of the budget.
For the second consecutive year there has been a high budgetary surplus, greater than EUR 15 000 million (16% of the final budget). The surplus is due to the cancellation of appropriations caused mainly by the delay in the implementation of structural measures. It would have been appropriate to modify the budget to maintain the balance between the forecast expenditure and revenue.
Another crucial feature of the budgetary management was the low rate of use of payment appropriations in certain areas. In the case of the Structural Funds, percentage of use was less then 70%, the lowest level since 1999.
Delays were also a feature of the implementation of pre-accession aid, especially in the case of the SAPARD programme, where only 9.2% of the appropriations were disbursed. What is more, only EUR 1 million were received by the final beneficiaries of this programme. If the pace of implementation does not pick up, appropriations will have to be cancelled in 2003.
The Commission must continue its effort to clear the accounts by cancelling those commitments which can no longer be implemented. Outstanding commitments amount to EUR 12 000 million in the case of external aid and to nearly 3 000 million in the case of the new pre-accession instruments.
The rate of implementation of the European Development Funds is just as sluggish. After four years, only 30% of appropriations under the 8th EDF have been disbursed.
To conclude, the estimates made for these programmes in terms of implementation and payments need to be more realistic and take account of each country's capacity to absorb aid. This would result in a more accurately calculated and balanced budget.
The Court has analysed the follow-up given to its previous observations. Generally speaking, the Commission has taken appropriate steps to remedy the shortcomings highlighted. For example, outward processing customs arrangements have been simplified, the legislation promoting joint enterprises in the fisheries sector has been improved and tendering procedures under the TACIS programme have been revised.
In other sectors developments have been less satisfactory. This is the case of the system of aid for durum wheat, where deficiencies that the Court pointed out in 1998 are still in evidence and some EUR 450 million are spent unnecessarily every year. This is also true of the Common Market Organisation for sugar, where, despite the 2001 reform, problems of overproduction and high prices persist.
When the Audit Progress Committee starts work, I am certain that the Commission will be able to be more diligent in following up the Court's reports.
Let us now move on to the Statement of Assurance.
It is the opinion of the Court that the accounts for 2001 reliably reflect the revenue and expenditure and the financial situation of the Communities. However, the Report does express some reservations and observations which for the most part concern defects in the accounting system on which the Court has previously remarked.
In its reply to our Report, the Commission acknowledges these shortcomings and undertakes to present a plan to modernise the accounting system before the end of 2002. The Court will examine the conception and implementation of this plan and will keep Parliament informed of its progress.
As in previous years, the Court is of the opinion that the transactions underlying the revenue, commitments and administrative expenditure are legal and regular. Nonetheless, because of the errors that we have highlighted we are unable to provide this assurance in respect of the other payments.
Most errors were detected in payments relating to agricultural policy and structural measures - in other words, in those management areas which the Commission shares with the Member States, and which account for some 80% of the budget. Reducing the frequency of errors will be contingent on significant improvements in the administration and control systems of both the Commission and the Member States.
Take the common agricultural policy, where the declarations submitted by the beneficiaries of subsidies have not improved compared with previous years. The launch of the Integrated Management and Control System has not been completed, and almost half of the Member States have not introduced the bovine identification system, which has been compulsory since 2000.
The next item is the report (A5-0397/2002) by Mrs Srensen on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on a proposal for a Council directive on the short-term residence permit issued to victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings who cooperate with the competent authorities [COM(2002) 0071 - C5-0085/2002 - 2002/0043(CNS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, before we go into the discussion of Mrs Srensen's report proper, I wish to express my appreciation of the quality of her work and congratulate her on her personal involvement in the fight against the veritable scourge that is the trafficking in human beings.
The proposal for a directive we are considering today is undoubtedly an extremely worrying problem; illegal immigration in its two particularly odious forms - on the one hand, the development of networks of smugglers who act for reasons that are far from humanitarian and, on the other, the exploitation of migrants in the trafficking of human beings. More precisely, this directive concerns the victims of trafficking and smuggling under these two types of offence, which must not be confused with one another.
One of the key elements of dismantling networks that exploit migrants lies in obtaining information. The victims are in the best position to be able to provide this type of information to the authorities. And, without this information, the authorities will find it more difficult to combat trafficking networks. The aim of this proposal is therefore to strengthen the instruments for combating networks, by establishing a residence permit for the victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings with arrangements that encourage them to cooperate with the competent authorities against the perpetrators of the offences in question, but avoiding any type of abuse in the way this mechanism is used.
It should be highlighted that, since trafficking in human beings and action facilitating illegal immigration are often interlinked, the scope of the text covers both offences, because these are basically parts of the same fight.
. (NL) Mr President, let me begin by thanking all those fellow MEPs who have contributed so much time and energy to what I think has been an extremely fruitful collaborative exercise.
It was in mid-September, and in this Chamber, that by far the most important conference on the subject of trafficking in human beings to date was organised by the International Organisation for Migration and the European Commission. It resulted in the so-called Brussels Declaration, and in this Brussels Declaration you can clearly see the central importance of the directive that you have before you to vote on today. It is important to point out straightaway that trafficking in human beings and smuggling of human beings form an integral part of our economy today. It is essentially about treating people as if they were nothing more than merchandise. At the same time victims of trafficking in human beings are victims of a whole range of abuses and criminal practices.
Trafficking in human beings has now also become the subject matter for committees, with nearly everyone seeming to want to take up a position on it. What is frequently overlooked is that trafficking in human beings is proliferating because corruption, along with indifference and disbelief, is proliferating. In a number of countries soon to become members of the European Union, parents sell their children in the hope of giving them a better future.
This proposal for a directive is a first and consequently important step towards eventual concrete action. The directive requires the Member States to issue a short-term residence permit to victims of smuggling of human beings or of trafficking in human beings who are prepared to cooperate with the competent authorities. The essence of the proposal is that, here, governments and the victims have shared interests, in particular that the criminal networks be shut down. For the purposes of this special directive, the Commission has taken trafficking in human beings and smuggling of human beings together. It is indeed the case that in purely legal terms they are two quite different things, but in reality the distinction is extremely difficult to make.
This proposal for a directive is however based on thorough practical knowledge of experts active in the field. The experience we have acquired in Belgium for example proves that the instrument of a short-term residence permit does not miss its mark. Other Member States too have such systems, albeit with varying degrees of success. I fully support the Commission's proposal and it is fundamentally important that its content remains intact. First and foremost this means that some of the amendments touched on by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs are unacceptable, in particular, for me, Amendments Nos 7 and 27, for the simple reason that they tear the proposal apart. They turn it into an empty shell. Voting for these amendments will be barely concealed approval for the practices of organised crime.
What I want to say is that this directive stands or falls by the minimum social provision for victims. A victim will never want to cooperate if he or she is not offered the beginnings of an alternative to the situation in which they currently find themselves. Allow me to say a few words on two other points.
Firstly, there are some who would want this directive to apply immediately to minors too. At first glance this seems a good idea, simply because we can never do enough for the extremely vulnerable position of minors. What is forgotten, however, is that what this directive is offering in the end is only a minimum. Minors are offered very much more today in all the Member States and it would therefore be a real step back if minors were only accorded such minimal protection and rights. This does not alter the fact that there is a real need for a special effort for victims who are minors.
Finally, I would like to say something else regarding a number of original amendments from Mrs van der Laan - Amendments Nos 20, 25 and 35. Her alert legal mind envisages the possibility that in certain cases contact between victim and criminal can be accepted by the authorities to further the investigation. It is a tempting idea, but it is a legal minefield in a number of countries. The risk of kidnappings or even of manipulation and intimidation is also very real. Victims willing to cooperate with the authorities want absolutely no contact at all with the criminals, not even from a distance.
I should also like to emphasise that this directive sets aside a special place for specialised and recognised NGOs, but also for international organisations and government agencies. As Mrs van der Laan has likewise rightly said - and, although this, because of a technical error, does not appear in the text in front of you, it has been noted on the voting list - NGOs also have a special part to play as intermediaries between the investigation and prosecution services on the one hand and the victim on the other. It is also important in this regard to emphasise that where NGOs are concerned they must be NGOs recognised by the state. After all, anyone, even criminals, can set up NGOs. Or, as not uncommonly happens, NGOs can be infiltrated and manipulated. I therefore think that everyone involved with this matter should sign a code of conduct.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, international estimates indicate that traffickers in human beings transport up to 700 000 people every year, mainly women and children. Every year, 120 000 women and children are lured into the European Union from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe alone. These figures do not take account of either illegal immigration or the smuggling of human beings. This highlights the urgent need for coordinated measures against this form of organised crime. The proposal for a directive, which provides for short-term residence permits to be issued to victims who cooperate with the competent authorities, is an important step. Up to now, there have not been any pan-European arrangements for dealing with the victims of action to facilitate illegal immigration or trafficking in human beings. However, we need common European standards if we are to combat this form of crime. The short-term residence permits proposed here will not undermine the current practice of deporting illegal immigrants. Instead, the authorities will be put in a position to obtain information and incriminating evidence from victims who cooperate, with a view to apprehending traffickers and smugglers of human beings and commencing criminal proceedings against them.
Immediate deportation of victims may improve the statistics, but it does not bring us any closer at all to achieving our objective of effectively combating organised crime, whereas short-term residence permits for victims who cooperate make it possible to identify structures, break up criminal rings and bring criminals to justice. That must be our goal.
At this point I would once again like to thank Mrs Srensen very sincerely for all the commitment she has put into this report. I would also like to thank the Commission and the other groups for their helpful cooperation, which I believe has led to a good end result in this report.
Mr President, Commissioner, we are about to give an opinion on an extremely important text, which deals with the question of combating the growth of networks of smugglers who exploit men, women and children in the form of trafficking in human beings. The aim is therefore to issue a short-term residence permit to the victims of these networks who cooperate with the courts or the police. A measure of this kind has been in force in Belgium, the Netherlands and in Italy and has had a very positive effect.
The report by Mrs Srensen, whom I would like to thank in particular, makes reference to the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights. Non-governmental organisations must play a greater role in assisting the victims of trafficking in human beings and we have strengthened the rights of victims by enabling them to submit an asylum application. It would be unfair to refuse them this right due to the fact that they often only have false identity papers. Let us note that it is essential that the Member States be required to protect the anonymity of victims of trafficking by only organising trials held in camera.
We are therefore on the verge of making great progress in Europe in combating trafficking in human beings. I would, however, draw your attention to Amendments Nos 7 and 27 which refuse the holders of a residence permit the right of access to the labour market, vocational training and education. This right was laid down in Article 12 of the Commission's proposal. Deleting this provision would completely distort the directive. Victims who have no way out of their situation would have great difficulty in cooperating with the police authorities and would easily fall back into the hands of mafia-like networks. This initiative will make victims stronger and will help them to cut ties with their illegal past as soon as they have severed relations with the criminal network. Let us reiterate that the Member States are still free to make the issue of permits conditional upon victims' participation in a rehabilitation programme aimed to encourage their integration in the host country or their return to the country of origin. We owe aid and assistance to the victims. This is how to ensure they remain law-abiding men and women.
Mr President, Commissioner, every day, people in Europe whose only desire is to make a future or new life for themselves or their families on our continent are abused and violated. Their longings are odiously exploited by all kinds of profiteers including those who transport these people to Europe and those who exploit their vulnerability within our own Member States. Many young women see their lives wrecked through prostitution and drugs. Others are exploited in hazardous occupations and are miserably remunerated outside any form of social protection system. People smuggling and trafficking in human beings must therefore be combated by every means available under the rule of law.
This directive provides us with an additional opportunity to seize the big players. We naturally have a responsibility to help the victims and give them the opportunity of a better life. I believe that many of them may have reasons for remaining within the EU if they so wish, but that must happen through the customary channels. With the help of the victims, what counts is getting at the big villains. At the same time, a fair and sensitive balance must be struck between supporting the victims and tackling criminal activity - a combination of humanitarianism and the rule of law.
Mrs Srensen's proposal improves the directive which can, however, be made better still. She herself mentioned a number of proposals. Of relevance in this connection are individual organisations and responsible state authorities, but what also matters is having the directive specify that victims be allowed access to the labour market, something which is not at present a part of this proposal. I want to second what has been said, to the effect that it clearly needs to be possible for people to extract themselves from the anxieties and serious problems that arise from their being so vulnerable. I want to thank Mrs Srensen for a very good piece of work.
Mr President, there is probably no one here in the Chamber, or outside it, who would say that he does not want to combat this type of criminal activity. I am fully aware that the police and prosecution services long for a framework directive. As politicians, we must nonetheless make an overall assessment and, just as the previous speaker said, balance various interests.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 4 December 2002.
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 12 December has been distributed.
Mr President, I understand it is not possible to request a change, but may one protest against a change made by the Conference of Presidents? Today we should have been debating the Napolitano report on the role of regional and local authorities in European integration. It is a vitally important issue, and Parliament should have been ready to give its opinion on this to the Convention before the end of this year. For example, this week the Fisheries Council is debating cod stocks and the common fisheries policy. Scotland, which is hugely interested in that, at the moment has a walk-on role. The role of the regions in Europe matters deeply to people all over Europe and this Parliament has, by a stitch-up between the big parties, declined to debate it, although we have had it before us since July. It is outrageous that this has been taken off the agenda.
The proposal from the Conference of Presidents is that it will be discussed in Parliament in January.
As regards the Commission communication at 5 p.m. which will be made by Mrs Diamantopoulou on the future of pension systems, the Commission wishes to make a second communication by Mrs Schreyer on the modernisation of accounting.
It seems to me that since both of these issues are of some interest and substance we run the possibility of running over on the time originally allocated. Perhaps whoever is in the Chair should have the discretion to add some extra time to allow colleagues to ask questions on these two important communications.
Mr President, this is a very acceptable suggestion, but there is a risk that, yet again, the Members' general opportunity to question the Commission at question time will be curtailed. Will question time be extended by a compensatory period please?
The plan, Mr MacCormick, is not to have them in competition with each other but to extend, if necessary, the appropriate sitting time.
Tomorrow at noon we will award the Sakharov Prize. At 5 p.m. in room WIC 100, we will celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the Sakharov Prize in the presence of many of the previous winners.
After the ceremony, at 6.30 p.m., there will be a special exhibition on the fifteen years of the Prize which will take place in the area outside room WIC 100.
Mr President, have you received any news from the Turkish Government regarding Leila Zana?
I have raised this matter at the Conference of Presidents on every occasion on which I have met with the Turkish authorities. I have no more information than you have in respect of your correspondence. However, when I speak tomorrow afternoon I will return to that matter on the assumption that our wishes will not, at that stage, have been fulfilled.
As regards the Council and Commission statements on safety at sea and measures to alleviate the effects of the Prestige disaster, I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for resolutions to be tabled to wind up this debate.
Mr President, that is something I wish to oppose. As recently as last month, we drafted a resolution on this very important topic, and a form of words relating to this terrible accident was to have been incorporated in the declaration adopted in Copenhagen. We do not consider any further, supplementary resolution on this topic to be appropriate; rather, the whole issue would be given even more weight, in our view, if something were to be framed to form part of the Copenhagen declaration. We therefore oppose the Socialist Group's motion.
Mr President, this disaster, without going into the issue in depth and in view of the information becoming available to us, currently involves at least four Community countries: Spain, France, Portugal and Denmark. It does not just involve maritime safety, but it is a transversal issue which involves at least four committees (Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, Fisheries, Development and Cooperation and Legal Affairs and the Internal Market). Therefore, not just in view of the dramatic situation in Galicia, but also thinking of the whole of the European Union, we must provide a response and also consider something which is important and which I hope has the agreement of the Group of the European Peoples' Party, at least it did last week: the creation of a committee of enquiry.
Mr President, I wanted to put another question relating to Wednesday. Why, yet again, has the time allotted to questions to the Council been reduced by half an hour? I want, at the same time, to register a protest against this. As you know, I regard the putting of questions as a fundamental parliamentary right. I regret the fact that this is happening more and more often.
The answer, Mr Posselt, is that we have set for the Council a very ambitious agenda. They will be here until 7 p.m. We have already allocated this time to other issues, including the one on which we have just voted.
Foot and mouth disease: lessons to be learned and proposals for the future
The next item is the report (A5-0405/2002) by Mr Kreissl-Drfler, on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease, on measures to control Foot and Mouth Disease in the European Union in 2001 and future measures to prevent and control animal diseases in the European Union [2002/2153(INI)].
. (DE) Mr President, Commissioner Byrne, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start with very warm thanks to all the colleagues who did serious work in the committee and on the report. I am especially grateful to our chairman, Mrs Redondo, to the secretariat, which did excellent work, to the scientific service, and to the Commission.
February 2001 saw what was no doubt the most serious outbreak of foot and mouth disease Europe had ever known. It affected Ireland, the Netherlands, France and, in particular, Great Britain. In Great Britain alone, where the epidemic indeed broke out, official estimates state that 6.5 million animals were killed in the course of combating it. Other sources mention up to 10 million. The Netherlands lost 285 000 animals and France, where there were four outbreaks, 65 000 of them. The consequences were catastrophic for everyone concerned. It makes no sense for any future policy on epidemics to be based solely on the slaughter of animals as a means of eradicating the virus, and no such approach will any longer be tolerated by the people of the EU.
At the beginning of this year, our Parliament set up a temporary committee - not, as some Members unfortunately persist in believing, a committee of inquiry - which had the aim of helping to create an improved policy that would work not only at EU level. One of our tasks was to use numerous public hearings and on-site visits to analyse the events in the Member States affected, to evaluate them fairly and take what we thereby learned as a means of drawing relevant conclusions as regards a Europe-wide policy on foot and mouth disease. This also means that we have no judicial function, nor are we able to resolve scientific disputes. In our report, we cannot pass judgments, let alone condemn anyone in advance for things we cannot prove anyway. This was not within our remit and we were not equipped for that purpose. Ladies and gentlemen, I am quite sure that any other government in the EU would have had similar problems to grapple with had it faced a comparable scenario, with between 50 and 70 simultaneous outbreaks across the whole country, and with sheep being affected as well.
We now know that, after economic and trade policy considerations led to vaccination being stopped in the EU in 1992, the emergency plans that have been elaborated have been defective, being designed for only a few outbreaks rather than for a worst-case scenario of this kind. The fact that the International Office of Epizootics, the OIE, would only restore the designation of 'FMD-free without vaccination' twelve months after the last vaccination meant that the watchword was 'kill rather than inoculate, or just inoculate in order to cull afterwards'. That this has been cut to six months since May this year represents a massive step forward. We advocate three months.
I want now to list some of our most important demands. Not only must future policy include effective emergency plans for the combating of epidemics, but all the Member States must check how their communications networks and decision-making structures would perform in an emergency, and run cross-border emergency exercises in real time. It is also essential that plans should take far greater account than hitherto of the psychosocial effects of any policy on the farmers affected by the epidemic and on all those banned from moving animals. Greater attention must be given to bio-safety. Every single farmer must be careful about what he feeds to his animals, from whom he buys them, and how quickly he brings them and his old stock together. For it was a farmer's irresponsible working practices that caused the epidemic to break out in Great Britain. There must be further improvements to the animals' traceability and therefore also to the way they are identified. It is also important to do everything possible to prevent illegal imports of animal products from countries where foot and mouth disease is endemic. The Commission has already decided that, for example, travellers from these countries may no longer bring products of this sort into the EU. But our most important demand in terms of action against future epidemics is that emergency vaccination should be regarded as the recourse of first choice, the object being to allow the animals to live on and assess products from them on a regional basis. This would be a crucial improvement on what was done in the past, as there continues to be no dispute about the absolute absence of any health risk to humans from the meat of inoculated animals and from other products derived from them. This, then, is an area in which there is an urgent need for people to be informed.
There is, though, one thing that I want to make clear. Infected stocks will always be slaughtered, as will any animals put at risk by contact with them. Economic considerations and the demands of the internal market, among other things, mean that there will be no early return to general vaccination, nor has it been called for in the hearings to date by any reputable expert. Do not, then, raise people's hopes too high. To do so would indeed be irresponsible.
Nevertheless, there needs to be further research towards finding an appropriate and durable marker vaccine capable of covering all serotypes and enabling an undoubted distinction to be drawn between inoculated and infected animals. I might mention that, in Germany until 1990, only cattle were inoculated, to the exclusion of all other animals.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am convinced that a policy such as that which we are proposing will put an end to images the like of which were broadcast around the globe last year.
Let me just say something about the voting. Vote for my amendments and for those tabled by the Socialist Group! They will do away with a whole array of accusations that have been levelled at the British Government, charges that we as a parliament - or so I personally understand parliamentary practice - are not entitled to bring in this way and are thus not justified. Being a politician myself, I can quite understand that they were made in an excess of political enthusiasm, but please do your infighting at home. For that purpose, the European Parliament is the least suitable of all platforms. And one more thing: there are fourteen Member States in the European Union besides Great Britain. It is important, ladies and gentlemen, that not only the British Government, but also the Council, the Commission, the candidate countries, the OIE and other states, such as, for example, the USA, Australia, Argentina and South Africa should be able to take our report seriously. The combating of epidemics calls for a worldwide strategy, as foot and mouth disease is an international disease and not a British one. It is my view that we, representing the peoples of the fifteen Member States, have achieved outstanding success in discussing this problem area as it deserves to be discussed, and in coming up with final conclusions that point the way ahead. What is, unfortunately, certain is that there will certainly be another outbreak of foot and mouth disease. The question is only that of where and when it will occur and with what intensity. Against that, we must be armed.
Mr President, I am grateful to Parliament, and in particular the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease, for its hard work in responding to the lessons to be learned from the 2001 foot and mouth epidemic. In particular I wish to thank Mrs Redondo Jimnez for her effective and objective chairing of the committee, the rapporteur, Mr Kreissl-Drfler, for a balanced, straightforward and future-oriented report, and the secretariat of the committee.
My services and I followed your work very closely. We have attended all your meetings, hearings, missions and discussions and have given evidence and support whenever required. I am confident that you will find that the views of Parliament are strongly reflected in the Commission's policy response to foot and mouth disease.
I will now turn to the key conclusions and recommendations in your report. First, the international dimension of Community policy on FMD; secondly, the single market issues that arise and, thirdly, control measures.
On the international dimension, I note the serious concern that poor controls on imports from third countries may have led to last year's outbreak and the calls for these controls to be strengthened. I wish to make a very clear distinction between illegal introduction and legal imports. Illegal actions are obviously, by their nature, very difficult to eliminate. The Commission has, however, made proposals within the framework of the hygiene package to withdraw exemptions from the strict animal health conditions and control procedures for imports. We have also adopted a decision to introduce tougher rules on the personal import of meat and milk products by travellers arriving in the EU from the majority of third countries. Our awareness campaign in relation to this measure will begin on 1 January 2003.
As for control on legal imports, the evidence indicates that Community import conditions and controls at external borders have been effective. Prior to last year's outbreak, the EU was broadly FMD-free for almost a decade. During that time hundreds of thousands of tonnes of fresh-meat products were safely imported. These imports included large quantities from disease-free regions in South America, where FMD is endemic and vaccination is practised. The outbreak last year could not have originated in South America as the O1 Pan-Asia strain of the virus is unknown in that continent.
Calls for a ban on such imports must be viewed in this light, yet such calls continue to be made. I find it difficult not to conclude that protectionist interests are involved here and may lie behind these demands.
Certainly, we must continue to insist on strict controls. We must equally reject pressures to turn them into thinly - or not so thinly - disguised barriers to trade. We must continue to pursue the eradication of FMD on an international level. To this end, we collaborate closely with international organisations, such as the FAO and the OIE, and will continue to do so.
I was deeply concerned to read some of the proposed modifications to the report, which suggested measures that would dismantle the European single market. I therefore congratulate the committee on rejecting most of these suggestions and on its pro-single-market stance.
As you are aware, most of our animal health legislation is in the form of directives. This approach provides sufficient flexibility for Member States to implement harmonised measures. However, shortcomings in implementation have certainly contributed to the magnitude of the 2001 FMD epidemic. The Commission has devoted much energy towards improving legislation where necessary and to reinforcing official controls in the Community. One of the key features of the UK epidemic was the huge number of frequently unrecorded movements of animals. The Commission has submitted a proposal to reinforce controls on the movement of animals. This proposal in particular introduced for sheep - as regards breeding and production - a mandatory residence of 30 days prior to despatch to another Member State. It also limits the number of assembly operations in assembly centres, approved under more stringent animal health requirements. This has attracted the support of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and of Parliament.
The Commission has proposed to the Council a major revision of the animal health and sanitary conditions applying to staging points where animals are rested for welfare reasons whilst in transit. The outbreak of FMD in the Netherlands can be directly linked to such a staging point, in France. Pending the outcome of the technical working groups in the Council, the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health unanimously supported a Commission proposal to extend the strict measures adopted during the FMD crisis until the middle of next year.
Movement controls can only be truly effective if there are reliable identification systems in place. It is clear that the major weakness in this respect is in relation to sheep.
The current provisions and, in particular, their implementation by Member States have proved to be insufficient to enable the veterinary authorities to trace animals. The Commission is making a new proposal for a regulation to require individual identification of sheep, with the option of future electronic identification. I hope the European Parliament will also support this proposal.
I should also mention another major development, the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy. The outcome of the review will have a decisive influence on the future direction of agricultural production in the EU. This in turn cannot be divorced from the health and welfare of animals.
One of the features of the mid-term review is the heavier emphasis on quality rather than quantity. I welcome this trend from a consumer perspective. But it should also assist from the perspective of disease avoidance and control.
Regarding vaccination, the huge numbers of animals slaughtered and destroyed during the outbreak last year had a profound impact on public opinion. We cannot ignore this. In fact, we have fully to take into account the deeply held views of our citizens. Our approach to FMD has to adapt accordingly. Clearly, the rapid slaughter and disposal of infected or susceptible animals must be an important element in our disease control strategy. Emergency vaccination must also play a central role, as appropriate to the circumstances.
There have been deep misunderstandings over the role of vaccination and the Commission's own position on this issue. I do not propose to repeat today what I have already said on this matter. My remarks now are therefore confined to future policy.
The Commission remains of the view that prophylactic vaccination of the entire susceptible livestock population or even particular species is not advisable for sound scientific, technical and economic reasons. The situation in the EU cannot be compared with the endemic FMD situation in South America or elsewhere. FMD is not endemic in the EU, and prophylactic vaccination is not appropriate in the EU. The Commission takes the view that emergency vaccination should, however, be moved to the forefront of the response mechanism in the event of future outbreaks.
The means are now available to detect infection in a vaccinated population and the Commission - now supported by the OIE - actively pursues further improvement of these tests. The forthcoming Commission proposal for a Council directive on FMD will reflect this position on emergency vaccination in line with the recent modifications made to the FMD chapter in the animal health code. But we must not be under any illusions: vaccination is not a miracle cure to solve all our problems. While it must play a much more important future role, it cannot serve as an excuse to weaken our efforts to keep FMD out of the EU, nor can it fully obviate the need for difficult measures in the event of future outbreaks.
The Copenhagen summit was a very particular moment in the life of the European Union. I had the privilege of representing Parliament during that summit. One could not help being touched by the sense of history in the making when, at the end, the Danish presidency negotiated to a conclusion the accord with each of the accession states.
I should say also that substantial terrain has been covered in the other work carried out by the presidency. Here, I am not referring to the main headline of enlargement, but to the work done over many months with this Parliament on conciliation, which was perhaps hidden from view by the preparations for enlargement. In terms of the attendance of the presidency, this is the 39th debate in plenary at which the presidency will speak. Contact with committees has been of an exceptional character and it has set us a new headline in interinstitutional relations with the Council which I hope we can build upon going forward.
I certainly want to say on behalf of Parliament to the Danish prime minister how grateful I am at the improved and substantial level of cooperation between our institutions.
The first item is the joint debate on the Danish presidency: the European Council report and Commission statement on the European Council summit of 12 and 13 December 2002, and the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the work of the Danish presidency.
- (DA) Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, the last time I spoke in this House was in the course of the debate on enlargement on 19 November. That was a great and positive experience. I left it with a strong and clear mandate to conclude the enlargement negotiations. I am delighted to be here today with an equally clear result. Following a long and difficult process, the Presidency concluded the negotiations with ten new Member States at the Copenhagen Summit.
It is our common dream that is coming true; it is our common aim that is being achieved. The European Parliament, the Commission and the Presidency have fought together for enlargement. I was especially pleased, therefore, that the President of the European Parliament took part in the final solemn occasion when, on Friday evening, we welcomed the new members into our Community.
The enlargement negotiations of the last sixth months have been like a long-distance race with a series of difficult hurdles that have had to be cleared along the way. Parliament, the Commission and the Presidency have stayed the course together, and in Copenhagen we passed the finishing line. Side by side, hand in hand. I should like to express my thanks for all the efforts made and for the unfailing support and the help along the way.
The decisions taken in Copenhagen closed one of the darkest and bloodiest chapters in the history of Europe. We put an end to a century characterised by wars and conflicts. We finally said goodbye to the Europe of the Yalta Conference and the Cold War. At the same time, we opened the door to a new era in the history of Europe: an era characterised by freedom, peace, growth and prosperity. The Copenhagen Summit marked a high point in the history of European cooperation: a triumph for freedom and democracy and a gateway to a better future for all our peoples.
The enlargement of the EU was the Danish Presidency's main priority - but we have a large number of other considerable achievements under our belt. We have been a presidency that has set priorities, but not at the expense of other issues. This can be seen from our achievements.
Before I move on to the Copenhagen Summit, I should like to outline a number of the other tasks that the EU has carried out in the last six months. We have successfully continued the fight against international terrorism and redoubled efforts against illegal immigration. In the field of asylum, we have reached agreement on what is known as the Dublin II regulation, which lays down common rules for which country should take responsibility for handling an asylum application.
We succeeded in reaching agreement on fully opening up the EU's electricity and gas markets. We achieved a breakthrough in EU transport policy. The rules on the Single European Sky have secured the basis for fewer cancellations and shorter flight times, benefiting passengers, the environment and airlines.
Together we have reacted swiftly and effectively to unexpected disasters. First there was the flooding in Central Europe. The EU showed solidarity by approving the establishment of a EUR 1 000 million Solidarity Fund for use in connection with natural disasters. Most recently, we reacted to the tragic loss of the oil tanker Prestige. At short notice, the EU showed its ability to act, adopting rules on matters such as the rapid phasing-out of single-hull oil tankers and stricter monitoring in the harbours used by the ships.
Agreement has been reached on the emissions trading scheme in CO2. Progress has been made with regard to food safety, including on common rules for the labelling of food containing GMOs. We succeeded in finding a solution to the question of transit to and from Kaliningrad that is acceptable to all parties.
Lastly, I wish to emphasise the positive and effective cooperation we have had with Parliament: the work on the codecision and budgetary procedures, amongst other things. For the first time in many years, we actually succeeded in reaching agreement on large parts of the budget as early as first reading. I should like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the good and positive spirit that has characterised the cooperation between the European Parliament, the Commission and the Presidency. Together, we have shown in the last six months that the EU can deliver the goods; that - despite national, institutional and political variations - we can together produce results, create a better, safer daily life for our citizens, create better conditions of competition for our industries and increase Europe's influence in the world.
I shall now return to the Copenhagen Summit. We concluded enlargement negotiations with ten new Member States: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia. These were intensive, difficult negotiations to the last. That is the nature of the beast: it ensured that we ended up achieving the right balance between the wishes of the candidate countries and the possibilities of the present Member States.
The tough negotiations on very specific issues such as milk quotas and credit transfers are, of course, ultimately an indication that the EU is not just a talking shop, adopting meaningless declarations, but an effective forum for discussion, in which we do business and make policy to the benefit of all parties.
The ten new countries can become members from 1 May 2004. By then, both the new and the existing Member States will have completed their national ratification procedures. The first stage in this process - which in many of the countries will entail referendums - is the completion of the accession treaty. This will then be presented to the Commission first of all, then Parliament and finally the Council for approval, with a view to the treaty being signed in Athens on 16 April 2003. I shall call on all three institutions to do their utmost to keep to this timetable.
The conclusions from the Copenhagen Summit also deal with the question of the participation of the new Member States in the institutions of the EU. We have laid down that the ten acceding states will be able to participate in the 2004 elections to the European Parliament as members. The accession treaty will lay down that the Commissioners from the new Member States will join the present Commission from the time of the countries' accession on 1 May 2004. Once the European Council has appointed a new President of the Commission, the newly elected European Parliament can approve a new Commission, which will have to take office on 1 November 2004. This provides a sensible framework for this fundamental issue. Here, too, I shall call for cooperation between the institutions to find flexible solutions that ensure the best terms for our new Member States.
With regard to Bulgaria and Romania, the conclusions are clear: the enlargement process is continuing; and we can confirm that the aim is to be able to welcome the two countries as members in 2007.
The issue of Turkey came to be one of the main topics in Copenhagen. We arrived at a balanced and realistic answer. We acknowledge the important steps that Turkey has taken towards meeting the Copenhagen criteria. We call upon Turkey to continue its reform process with vigour, and we pledge increased support from the EU to Turkey in these endeavours. If the European Council decides in December 2004, on the basis of a report and a recommendation by the Commission, that Turkey has met the Copenhagen political criteria, the European Union will open accession negotiations with Turkey as quickly as possible. This sent a strong and positive signal to Turkey, but I would emphasise that it is still an essential requirement that Turkey meet the political criteria before accession negotiations can be opened. This is the way it has to be. Turkey must be treated in the same way as all the other candidate countries.
Then there is Cyprus. Cyprus will join as a divided island; but, at the same time, there is a realistic possibility that the parties will be able to find a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue by 28 February 2003 on the basis of the UN Secretary-General's proposal. I would urge the parties to the conflict in the strongest terms to seize this unique opportunity to resolve this unfortunate conflict. We all stand to gain by finding a solution now, and none so much as the population of Cyprus.
In Copenhagen, we sent out a clear message to the new neighbours of the enlarged EU: to the countries of the western Balkans, to Russia, the Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus, and to the countries of the southern Mediterranean. Enlargement will not result in the EU shutting itself in; on the contrary, the EU will strengthen links to its new neighbours. This will take place both within the framework of, and by means of the development of, the existing cooperation instruments.
In addition, at the Copenhagen Summit, there was agreement on the frameworks for the future agreement between NATO and the EU on European Security and Defence Policy.
I should like to mention by way of conclusion that the European Council also met with the Chairman of the European Convention, Mr Giscard d'Estaing. He reported on the work in the Convention, and there was consensus in the European Council that the Convention should present the results of its work before the summit in June 2003. It was stated that the new Member States will participate fully in the Intergovernmental Conference. Bulgaria and Romania will take part as observers.
Now that enlargement is home and dry, the work in the Convention has become the crucial task in European politics. We have enlarged the EU; we now have to ensure that the EU of the future, with more than 25 Member States, can also function effectively. We must simplify the decision-making procedures and stress the EU's values. We must describe the division of labour between the EU and the Member States more clearly, we must extend the use of qualified majority voting and the codecision procedure, and we must ensure that we have cooperation that is open and subject to democratic control.
The Danish Presidency is now drawing to a close. We are passing the baton of the Presidency on to Greece, wishing them good luck and thanking them for the good troika cooperation.
Finally, I wish to turn, once again, directly to the Members of this Parliament, and especially to the President, Mr Cox. The meeting of the President of Parliament with the European Council in Copenhagen was yet another constructive affirmation of the close relations between Parliament and the Council. The Danish Presidency has attached great importance to meeting the European Parliament with an outstretched hand and the will to enter into constructive cooperation. It is with satisfaction that I have been able to note that Parliament has met us in the same positive spirit. We have had our differences, but the cooperation between us has been characterised by progress, results and a willingness to compromise. I have experienced this in this House, at our interinstitutional summits and at my meetings with the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament. This picture is echoed by Danish government ministers. I should like to take this opportunity to thank everyone for this constructive cooperation. Above all, however, I wish to express my thanks for the unqualified support of Parliament for the implementation of the Danish Presidency's greatest task: concluding the negotiations with ten new Member States. The decision, in Copenhagen, on the enlargement of the EU marked the reunification of the peoples and states of Europe, the end of the unfortunate division of our continent and the beginning of a new era in the history of Europe.
The Copenhagen Summit also marked the beginning of a new era for the European Union. In Copenhagen, the EU carried out the greatest task in the history of the Community. Following the Copenhagen Summit, the European Union stands as the overall framework around the Europe of the future: cooperation based on the shared values of freedom and the market economy, community spirit and social responsibility, democracy and human rights; effective cooperation that respects the national characteristics of our peoples and states.
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading by Mrs Pack (A5-0419/2002), on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 [9605/2/2002 - C5-0498/2002 - 2001/0244(COD)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we used to learn at school: 'Mens sana in corpore sano' - a healthy mind in a healthy body, and we are, in theory, all acquainted with this wisdom from ancient Rome. Of all leisure activities, sport is the most widespread, with one out of every three Europeans participating in some form of it, some of them, indeed, continuing to do so well into old age.
Physical activity promotes health, and competition in sport develops a range of social skills, such as friendship, team spirit, solidarity, commitment, perseverance and, last but not least, fair play. As you will all be aware, you can tell a good sportsman by the way he wins, but a great one by the way he loses.
Despite sport's essential social role, ladies and gentlemen, there is no policy on it at Community level. We have therefore been campaigning in this House for a number of years already, for the legal basis for this to be enshrined in the Treaties. We can therefore unreservedly welcome the way the Commissioner has at last responded to the aspiration expressed in my last report on sport, produced as long ago as 1996, and proclaimed a year of sport. It is admittedly not being called the Year of Sport, but, for many understandable reasons, the 'Year of Education through Sport 2004'.
It is about using a large number of projects to highlight sport's role in informal learning and its educational value, and also the close partnership between school sport and the services provided by the many kinds of sporting organisations that exist in Europe. To come to the point, the objective and rationale of the 'European Year of Education through Sport 2004' is not to show what people are capable of in the sporting arena - something that we can demonstrate to ourselves to our own satisfaction every day of the year on dozens of television channels - but to show what sport can do in human terms and for people.
There is consensus in this House as regards the Year's seven objectives. It is to promote cooperation between educational institutions and sporting organisations, the development of social skills through sport, voluntary activity, pupils' mobility by means of international competitions, a balance between mental and physical activity, as well as consideration of how the educational needs of young sportsmen and women are to be met.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Council has accepted the essential points of the report passed by this House at First Reading stage. What is important is that it has confirmed the amount of funding involved, the EUR 11.5 million that the Commission believes to be sufficient to complete in this Year those things that it has in mind to do. If everyone now plays their part - and that includes the media - then this Year can be of truly great significance for sport. I very much hope that the trend towards the decreasing importance of school sport can be turned round. By means of this Year, we want to build up networks and give an impetus to cross-border cooperation.
What we do not want is for the small amount of money to be spent on even more interminable research projects. Research is always in progress, and that is not what this Year is for. I believe that the only research we need is to ask ourselves, when it is all over, 'what has this Year achieved?' but otherwise not to spend money on it. The Council shares our view on this. It has also accepted my idea of organising a European competition in the run-up to the Olympic Games - incorporating it, not into the Treaty, but into a protocol. I am very happy about this, and I very much hope that the Commission will respond to our concern by announcing a competition culminating in its victors being allowed to be present at the lighting of the Olympic flame in Olympia in 2004. That would be a fitting climax for the Year of Education through Sport.
What, ladies and gentlemen, is all this about? It is our intention to establish a platform for educational measures in sport above and beyond frontiers, institutions of state education and organisations. We want to kick-start cross-border initiatives and networks, and we have to set up an ideas exchange, enabling exemplary projects and initiatives - that is to say best practices - to be followed by as many as possible during the preparations in 2003 and the actual Year in 2004. The Community projects instrument will receive 80% support, and those things done at national level alone will receive 50% co-financing. This seems to me to be very well suited to putting this Year's European dimension centre-stage.
I think I will leave it at that, but would like to thank the Council and the Commission and express the hope that we will all be able to take the idea of this Year of Education through Sport back to our communities, and that, eventually, the Convention will be astute enough to give sport a legal basis.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have an announcement to make to you, which has to do with the tragic accident to the oil tanker Prestige, which foundered off the coast of Galicia, and the final conclusions newly adopted by the Council in Copenhagen. I have received from the Commission a proposal, relating to these events, for a regulation instituting specific measures to compensate the Spanish fisheries, shellfish industry and aquaculture affected by the oil spills from the Prestige. In view of the circumstances of extreme urgency and the grave effects involved, the Council will do everything in its power to ensure that this proposal is adopted without delay and, if possible, during the Council meeting that is currently in progress. Parliament should deliver the opinion required of it as soon as possible. The proposal has been agreed with the Committee on Fisheries, and I propose that we should change the agenda in such a way that we can vote on this proposal at midday today. As there are no objections to this proposal, that is how we shall proceed.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I often have had the pleasure of speaking in this House, but I have to say that today is a special occasion and I share with you the feeling that what we are doing here is of great significance. I would even go so far as to say that it is almost a historic moment for the young people of our countries. Indeed, you are about to adopt the decision to make 2004 the European Year of Education through Sport. This is the first time that such a large-scale initiative has been launched at Community level in the field of sport, particularly one focusing on its educational value.
It is also the first time that such a clear message has been sent to our citizens, showing them that the Community institutions will henceforth be concerning themselves with the social and educational potential of sport and its fundamental role in informal education. It was right that the recognition of this value should take place in the European Parliament, for it is the European Parliament which has been calling for years for more focus on sport.
Within the framework of the European Year, resources, good intentions and imagination will be mobilised throughout an entire year to promote a policy, to promote an approach, to enable civil society to participate. I am sure that a European Year of Education through Sport can make a decisive contribution to the promotion of the ideals we share, the ideal of sport as having an educational role and as a means of imparting values.
Today, therefore, the decision that you are about to adopt with your vote is good news for the worlds of education and sport. It is also the formalisation of the astute work carried out together by Parliament, the Commission and the Council. Our spirit of partnership, our faultless cooperation and our consensus on the text mean that, today, if this were an Olympic competition, we would have to share the gold medal. All this means that everything is now in order and we can therefore move on and start the practical work, for the discussions have progressed quickly and well. There has been no need for red cards to be given out, to use a football metaphor, which is clear evidence that our joint effort has been carried out in a spirit of sincere friendship. Moreover, the European Parliament has played its part fully: our original text has been amended and altered and the result - I am not ashamed to admit - is an improvement on the Commission's text.
Ladies and gentlemen, you emphasised the need to carry through practical measures relating to basic sport. You placed the emphasis on projects in the field rather than on reports and studies. You highlighted the need for a partnership between sports organisations and education organisations. Lastly, you clarified the objectives of our Year of Education through Sport and you pointed out the need to respect the principle of subsidiarity and the respective competences. All these demands have been taken into account and included in the final decision. At its last meetings, the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport deemed that the Council's common position gave due consideration to Parliament's main concerns, and I believe that is the case.
I have noticed, during my travels throughout Europe and my conversations and meetings how popular this new initiative is already and how high the expectations are of our citizens, in our schools, in sports organisations and public authorities. I am therefore quite convinced, ladies and gentlemen, that this European Year of Education through Sport will be a great Year. If, by way of example, we consider the European Year of Languages and the way it developed through the contributions of the citizens, I am sure that, run along the same lines, the European Year of Sport will be even more effective and have an even greater effect on our different societies.
Some days ago, in Vienna, at a conference on the subject of Europe and ethics, President Prodi said: 'Europe ? needs ideas and a soul'. Our work on the value of sport, on social and educational sport, will help to bring this about. I am delighted to say that education and sport are at the centre of everyone's daily concerns. The only thing we have to do, and we will succeed in this, is to promote the positive aspects of sport over the negative tendencies.
On a practical level, I can now tell you that my staff have already been working on the calls for proposals which need to be launched in the coming months. We are already thinking about a schedule, events and setting up an advisory committee. I must admit that, as you can see, this vote is not the final whistle marking the end of an impeccably played political game. Rather, it is the starting pistol. Of course, Parliament will be regularly informed of the progress made on the European Year. The Commission does, of course, have a formal obligation to keep Parliament informed, but this will also give me the opportunity to hear your ideas, for you have made such a useful contribution to the initial development of the idea of the Year.
Mr President, I spoke just now of the historic vote on education through sport. The year 2004, as everyone knows, will be a historic year in many other respects too: enlargement, then the Convention and many other major events. In this connection, I would like to ask you to reflect on the following questions. In a Europe which wants to be close to the citizens, can we continue to see sport just as a commercial activity? Should we not take notice of the fact that sport has pride of place in the citizens' daily lives? Is sport not an important part of any citizenship policy?
Mr President, I know that Parliament has started to discuss these questions and that you are already aware of the role played by sport in European integration and in awakening a European spirit in our fellow citizens. In a similar way, the sporting values that we are going to promote vigorously among the younger generations and citizens of Europe will be the basis for active citizenship in which there is respect for others and respect for the European ideal.
Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the hard work she has done and to say once again that sport has shown itself to be a very effective tool in education. Both in normal situations and in extreme situations, in marginalized areas, when there is a need for integration, amongst many others. Furthermore, it is a great tool for educating on issues such as the environment, food, health, teamwork etc. We should take the greatest possible advantage of this.
We must take advantage of the fact that 2004 is the European Year of Education through Sport in order to demonstrate to the Europeans that we in the European Union are also concerned about sport and that we attach much importance, for example - since I do not want to give an interminable list - on the benefits which it brings for health, for the integration of people in our Europe and for the fight against xenophobia.
We must also take advantage of the possible impact of 2004 to demonstrate that it is entirely compatible to work for sport in the 15 Member States - or 25, when enlargement takes place - and also at Community level, at the same time, and that they must not fear that we are going to take over their competences. What we do want is to fill the vacuum left by subsidiarity so that the Europeans can benefit from the numerous positive aspects of sport. I therefore ask that we all make an additional effort so that, in the next review of the Treaty on European Union, an article relating to sport may be included, once and for all, so that the Europeans may see that here, in the European Parliament, in the European Commission and in all the European institutions, we care about sport as an essential tool for improving their quality of life.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am glad that sport has been put on the agenda for today without, as is so often the case, having to be deferred until the evening. I see it as a good start that we are able, today, to discuss it during the day.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 19 December 2002.
I must apologise for the late arrival of Mr Pat Cox, our President, but he is currently on his way rather slowly from Frankfurt. We expect him sometime soon.
The House learnt with great sadness of the death last weekend of Roy Jenkins, a distinguished political leader, and a former Minister in the United Kingdom. The House will recall his four years as President of the European Commission. During his stewardship he launched the European Monetary System, the forerunner of the single currency. He was an outstanding and committed European and statesman, and I invite the House to observe one minute's silence in his memory.
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 9 January 2003 has been distributed.
For the first time in the history of this particular Parliament an alternative resolution to the Swiebel report on fundamental rights is being proposed by Mr Ribeiro e Castro. Mr Ribeiro e Castro unfortunately cannot be here because of the weather conditions, since he has had problems travelling here. He will be here later. But I want to request that the Swiebel report be postponed to a later date.
You are too late to change today's agenda. That should have been notified by 4 p.m. today.
I have received from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance a request to remove the item 'Humanitarian crisis in North Korea' from the debate on breaches of human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
Mr President, I would just like to explain why we are asking for this item to be removed from the agenda - moreover, we would then be in favour of the item on Illinois being included - and we would like to ask whether a statement on North Korea might be included on the agenda of the Brussels part-session at an appropriate time, given the country's announcement that it intends to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We feel it would be more appropriate for this item to be addressed in a more formal, more in-depth manner than will be possible in a last-minute topical and urgent debate.
I will just clarify for the House that you are proposing that North Korea be taken in the second part-session this month.
Mr President, our group has just been discussing this issue, and it is our opinion that the topicality and urgency of developments in North Korea make it imperative that this issue be dealt with this week. In the event of further discussion of this issue becoming necessary, we will sort that out at a future date. We are therefore against the topic of North Korea being removed from the list of topical and urgent matters for debate.
Mr President, I would like to make a proposal to the Liberal Group that they withdraw this proposal and that the whole House should ask the President to make a statement on its behalf, addressed to the speakers of both Houses of the US Congress, expressing our pleasure at the decision of the Governor of Illinois. The reason is very simple: in Europe we are abolitionists and this is an issue which is even proposed as one of the Copenhagen conditions.
Our colleagues in the US Congress are aware of our position, and it would be very difficult for my group to vote against the Liberal Group's proposal for procedural reasons, since we agree with it. We believe it would be more forceful and more helpful to the abolitionist campaign in the United States if we were to express our complete agreement and support for this decision by means of a statement by the President than to invoke urgency, which may seem somewhat polemical.
Since we are in complete agreement, we could maintain the urgency and, at the same time, send a constructive and positive message to the US Congress, which is a partner of ours.
Mr President, I am delighted with the support we have received from Mr Barn Crespo and the PSE Group. I can assure you that my group is deeply concerned about the situation in Chechnya and it is something which must command the attention of this House. However, it is something on which we have frequently expressed ourselves and there is no particular urgency.
The action of the Governor of the State of Illinois in the United States is something we very much welcome. The position of this House, over many years, on this issue has been so consistent that we should take this opportunity to welcome what has happened, and indeed we should call on the 38 remaining states in the United States of America which still apply the death penalty to follow the example set in Illinois. It is for that reason that we maintain our request for an urgency on this subject.
Mr President, I do not need at this present moment to say anything more about whether the motion from the Group of the European Liberals and Democrats should stand, or whether we are opposed to it. As Mr Barn Crespo has already expressed his opposition to the deletion of Chechnya from the agenda, I will not speak further on the subject. I am very much in favour of our also discussing Chechnya.
Speaking on behalf of my group, though, I wish to associate myself with Mr Barn Crespo's proposal that we should - in view of the Liberals' inability to gain a majority on the subject - mandate the President to issue a statement in which, without risking our position being misunderstood, and without the statement being tinged with any sort of anti-Americanism, we express our opposition to capital punishment. Whilst being friendly towards America, we very definitely oppose the death penalty.
The next item is the joint debate on the following four reports, drawn up on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism:
A5-0417/2002 by Mr Jarzembowski on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91/440/EEC on the development of the Community's railways (COM(2002) 25 - C5-0038/2002 - 2002/25(COD));
A5-0424/2002 by Mr Sterckx on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on safety on the Community's railways and amending Council Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of railway undertakings and Directive 2001/14/EC on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification (COM(2002) 21 - C5-0039/2002 - 2002/0022(COD));
A5-0418/2002 by Mrs Ainardi on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 96/48/EC and Directive 2001/16/EC on the interoperability of the trans-European rail system (COM(2002) 2- C5-0045/2002 - 2002/0023(COD)) and
A5-0441/2002 by Mr Savary on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on establishing a European Railway Agency (COM(2002) 23 - C5-0046/2002 - 2002/0024(COD)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would firstly like to warmly thank the four rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done, which means that the plenum is being presented with some generally positive reports, which move in the same direction as the Commission's proposal and support the Commission's approach.
I would like to thank Parliament, which, furthermore, has dealt with these reports as a global package, resisting the temptation to divide it up, which would undoubtedly have hindered our common objective of finally creating a genuine European rail area.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the second stage of a prolonged process. Following the entry into force on 15 March 2001 of the three directives of the infrastructures package, which will have to be incorporated into the Member States' legislations from 15 March 2003, we must now complete the legislative framework in order to speed up the creation of a genuine European rail area. The four proposals we are going to debate today fall within the framework of this process.
I will firstly comment on the proposed amendment to Directive 91/440/EEC, extending access rights to infrastructure and freight services within the Member States, and to speed up the opening up of the market. The rapporteur is Mr Jarzembowski, who has done a wonderful job.
Ladies and gentlemen, the White Paper on European transport policy provides an alarming description of the development of rail freight transport. Over the last twenty years, the quota corresponding to this sector - within the overall distribution of goods transport in the Union - has been reduced by half, from 15% in 1980 to 8% in 1999. Over this period, the quality of services provided to clients has not improved and in certain Member States it has worsened. This is therefore an extremely pressing issue. I do not believe we can wait until 2008 to open up international goods transport to competition throughout the European network.
We must also deal with domestic transport. That is why certain modifications are proposed to replace the timetable and methods for opening up laid down in Directive 2001/12/EC, without waiting any longer for the opening up of freight transport, both national and international, to the whole of the network. In practice, this total opening up of access rights in the field of freight would be effective by 2006, which would mean bringing forward this opening up to the whole network by two years.
Ladies and gentlemen, the second proposed directive relates, of course, to rail safety. I believe that the issue of safety in transport is something which occupies and preoccupies all of us, especially at the moment. I would also like to thank Mr Sterckx for his work.
We must guarantee that the integration of the European rail network does not mean a reduction in the maximum levels of the safety standards in the various Member States of the Union. But at the same time we must guarantee that the establishment of common rules prevents any possibility that, as a result of safety issues, the market may be harmed or there may be any discrimination in access to the networks. The creation of an internal market in rail services would not be possible without the establishment of common safety rules.
Furthermore, the opening up of the markets and the end of the monopolies considerably modify such an important factor as the system of responsibilities in the field of safety, and it is therefore necessary to establish a coherent, transparent and clear framework which prevents any doubt in this area.
The safety directive focuses on four areas: the designation of national safety authorities, separate from the operators, with clearly defined responsibilities; the determination of the essential elements of safety systems in relation to the operator of infrastructures and rail companies and the establishment of a mechanism for determining and adopting common safety objectives and methods - a role to be played by the rail Agency; the establishment of a common system for the issuing, content and validity of safety certificates; finally, the introduction, as in other sectors, of the principle of independent technical investigations in the event of accidents.
We now come to the third proposed directive. If we establish the network, if we guarantee a common level of safety, with clearly defined responsibilities, it is also necessary to establish an interoperable system. Hence the amendment of Directives 96/48/EC and 2001/16/EC on interoperability, whose rapporteur is Mrs Ainardi.
As well as the modifications which experience suggests we should make, it is essentially a question of guaranteeing coherence in the scope of the network in which opening up of access is carried out and the network in which the interoperability standards must be applied.
It is also a question of sending a very clear message about the need to standardise equipment, with a view to reducing costs. We cannot just remove administrative borders, but we must also remove technological borders in order to create this European rail network.
I would like to express my gratitude for the work done on an enormously technical and arduous subject, but on which the work of Parliament and the rapporteur have once again been of the highest quality.
I will finally comment on the fourth proposal, to create a European Railways Agency, on which Mr Savary has done some very considerable work.
The Agency is the cornerstone, it will complete the circle and will be the instrument which will allow us to make progress in the field of the interoperability of rail safety and therefore to guarantee the integration of the European rail network.
This Agency will provide technical support for decision making, without autonomous competences, and will provide the Commission with opinions and recommendations. The texts in question will be adopted by the Commission in accordance with a comitology procedure, as is currently the case in relation to interoperability.
Its main fields of activity will be as follows: the technical drawing up of texts planned for the directive on safety - common safety objectives and common safety methods - and for the directives on interoperability; the creation of a network of national safety and interoperability authorities; technical advice to the Commission and the national authorities on specific cases in the field of safety rules.
This Agency, which will be made up of some 100 people, will be responsible for promoting the work of the technical approximation of rail systems and will be independent, although it will work in close cooperation with experts in the sector.
Mr President, to conclude, the texts proposed intend, on the one hand, to ensure that 15 incompatible national systems develop technically towards an integrated and competitive European rail area and, on the other, to speed up the opening up of the market in freight transport, so that operators can provide effective services in any part of the Union. Let us finally opt for a modern railway, worthy of the twenty-first century, which is able to compete effectively with other modes of transport.
Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that this is a good day, even if there are not so many people listening at the moment - and I hope that the press will report on this important debate - because we are finally on the way towards also establishing an internal market in the rail sector. This is an absolutely crucial point, because this is the only internal market that is actually still lacking in the transport sector. That is why, Commissioner, our four reports express our full agreement, in principle, with the Commission's basic ideas. However, being a self-assured Parliament and co-legislator, we have also tabled some substantial amendments to the four Commission proposals. I hope that the Commissioner will support all of them.
Why have we tabled amendments? By tabling these amendments we are seeking to hasten the revitalisation of the rail sector in the European Union. We must create the necessary framework conditions sooner, because if we do not manage to revitalise the railways, we will not meet our European transport policy objective - laid down in the White Paper - by 2010 either. By 2010 we want to bring the different modes of transport back into balance, which in practice means that we want to carry more freight by rail instead of by road and more passengers by rail instead of by air or road.
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Afghanistan, one year after the Bonn Agreement.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is now a year since the Bonn Agreement was signed in 2001 and, as we look back over what has already been done and what has yet to be done in order to ensure it is fully implemented, I would point out that this Agreement laid the foundations for a new, modern Afghan state and that there is cause for reserved satisfaction with the progress it has made so far.
Once a transitional authority and administration had been set up, an emergency Loya Jirga was convened and elected a president. A Judicial Commission and an Independent Human Rights Commission have been set up. A central bank has been established and has introduced a national currency. A drafting committee has been set up as a forerunner to a Constitutional Commission. A proposal has been adopted for a national development framework, which will be used as a guide for rebuilding and improving the situation in the country. President Karzai has issued a decree creating an Afghan national army, an important step towards Afghan ownership in the field of security and stability. On 22 December 2002, Afghanistan and its six neighbours signed the Kabul Declaration of Good Neighbourly Relations, in which they agreed not to interfere in each other's internal affairs; this will do a great deal to foster peace and stability in the region. Generally speaking, President Karzai and the Afghan Transitional Administration have achieved substantial results and the Bonn Process is on the right track.
During the Petersberg Conference on 2 December reaffirming the commitment to supporting the Bonn Agreement on Afghanistan and inject new impetus into efforts to rebuild the country, a declaration was issued containing a clear reference to the objectives and timetable for applying the Bonn Process, introducing a new constitution and holding elections in 2004.
Both the Afghan Transitional Administration and the international community, however, still have a great many challenges to meet between now and then. Over the past six months there have been a number of reforms, some visible reconstruction and limited restoration of the balance of power both within the central administration and between the centre and the regions. Progress needs to be made in these sectors in order to boost the confidence of the Afghan people, which is the key to support for the administration. The whole idea behind the Bonn Agreement was that transitional arrangements should be based on traditional, local, national and religious structures in Afghanistan. And every effort must be made to ensure there is proper representation, in accordance with rules introduced by the central administration.
Consequently, the administration will need to introduce even greater order over coming months, keep a lid on hostilities and improve how the institutions function, because otherwise it risks incurring the disappointment of the people, with the risk of their turning their back on the central administration, relaxing in their efforts to meet the demands of the international community and jeopardising the efforts being made to achieve the objectives of the Bonn Agreement. By definition the administration is fragmented, with its members coming as they do from every corner of the country, which is why it is vital for it to consolidate its efforts and speed up the process to rebuild the country. One way of supporting the central administration is to ensure that all aid is channelled through it; this will affirm its authority to the entire country and ensure that neighbouring countries and local leaders are on board.
Security continues to be a priority and we feel that all the Afghan groups should be encouraged to solve their grievances in a peaceful manner. We share the view of the Afghan people that, as long as there is a state of insecurity, the degree of progress hoped for has still not been made. Rebuilding the country's economy should also be a priority. The Afghan authorities need to work with the International Monetary Fund and introduce an efficient and cohesive macroeconomic and monetary framework within which stable economic development can be fostered and donors' contributions invested. As part of this, we need to encourage the Tokyo donors to make the promised funds available through the national investment budget presented by the Afghan administration.
Naturally, Community aid to Afghanistan will continue to be provided on terms dictated by the basic principles and values we subscribe to as members of western society. Our terms are geared to achieving the aims of the Bonn Agreement and, by extension, ensuring all sides in Afghanistan comply with the procedure set up to achieve peace, a representative government and stability, convict terrorists and stop the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics. Community aid must be geared to rebuilding a stable nation, improving the food supply and supporting the return of refugees and exiles.
Unless democratic values, pluralism and the respect for human rights, including women's rights, are strengthened, there can be no social or political development in Afghanistan. We are encouraging the Afghan Transitional Administration, in close consultation with the international community, to establish verifiable benchmarks and timetables to ensure the full implementation of the Bonn Agreement. The Council has already expressed its appreciation for the role Turkey assumed as lead nation for the international peacekeeping force and we would like to commend Germany and the Netherlands for agreeing to take over the command of ?SAF for the next six months and wish them every success with this difficult mission.
I should like to reiterate the European Union's commitment, in cooperation with the United Nations, to help Afghanistan eliminate the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics through accelerated implementation of reconstruction programmes, including in poppy-growing areas, the development of law-enforcement institutions, and provision of an alternative, better livelihood for the local people.
If Afghanistan is to enter modern statehood, it needs to reform its security, administrative, judicial, financial and social domains. We welcome the fact that a constitutional drafting committee has been set up to draft a constitution which will modernise the judicial system and protect human rights. However, we note that the Civil Service Commission is not yet fully functioning. The European Union is committed to contributing to the work of these bodies. The Judicial Commission needs to be strengthened if it is to improve the procedural system. We welcome Italy's contribution here in organising the conference on the Afghan legal system in Rome last December. We need timetables and benchmarks here in order to ensure the provisions of the Bonn agreement are applied. Activating the constitutional drafting committee and adopting an electoral law so that elections can be held by June 2004 are immediate priorities here and the presidency will continue to monitor these issues through the European Union's special representative in Afghanistan.
2003 will be a crucial year for Afghanistan and will most likely decide the future shape of the country. During 2003, President Karzai will need to push through the reforms needed for fast reconstruction and rebuilding, curtail the powers of local leaders, draft a modern, working constitution based on the principles of honest administration, convene a constituent Loya Jirga and start preparations for elections in 2004, so that the Afghan people can realise their aspirations for peace and progress in Afghanistan and determine their own future, free from violence and fear. We have reiterated the European Union's continued commitment to delivering a substantial contribution to the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Finally, may I remind you that, in its conclusions of 4 December, the Council invited the High Representative and the European Union's special representative, Mr Vendrell, to follow closely the implementation of the Petersberg commitments and, in cooperation with the Commission, to make recommendations for further actions that the European Union can undertake in support of the Afghan Transitional Administration.
Mr President, I very much welcome this opportunity, with my colleague Mr Ionitsis, to discuss progress in Afghanistan over the past year. As I said to the Foreign Affairs Committee in December, the changes have been in many respects dramatic, and do offer a real chance to build a stable democracy. But timing is critical; there is - as the Minister properly underlined - a limited window of opportunity which we have to exploit. Unless President Karzai and his Government manage to strengthen their position throughout the country, then there is a risk that these early gains will be lost.
But before turning to the substantial challenges that lie ahead, I would like to say something about the successes of 2002, successes accomplished in extremely difficult circumstances.
Only a year ago donors met in Tokyo to pledge over USD 1.8 billion for 2002. Much has since been achieved in Afghanistan. In the summer, President Karzai was elected by an Emergency Loya Jirga to lead the Afghanistan Transitional Authority; constitutional and judicial commissions have been established; a new currency has been introduced, and the process of recovery and of reconstruction is well under way with increasingly strong leadership from the Afghan Government.
The international community has not only honoured the pledges made at Tokyo, but, not least in comparison with some problems we have experienced in the past, the speed of disbursement has been remarkable.
The track record of the European Union and the European Commission has been, I think one can fairly say, particularly impressive. By early December, EUR 755 million of the total European Union commitment of over EUR 830 million had actually been disbursed. The Commission has played a leading role in co-ordinating the European Union effort and we have been actively involved in building up a strategic dialogue on Afghanistan with the United States and other G-8 partners.
I must say that I am very proud of the quality of the EC assistance programme and the speed with which it has been delivered. It is a fine example of a successful linkage between relief and recovery, and it has been a good test case for the reform of the management of the external service. It is also fair to pay tribute to the excellent staff we have at the newly set-up EC office in Kabul.
I would also like to pay tribute to the Special Representative, who brings so much knowledge and so much expertise to his extremely challenging work.
In more concrete terms, our development programme of over EUR 205 million in 2002 has helped to finance: firstly, the operation of 238 health clinics and over 450 primary schools as part of the Government's 2002 Back to School campaign; secondly, the clearance of landmines and unexploded bombs from more than 8 000 square kilometres of land; thirdly, the return of some 17 000 key public sector workers, including the return to service of over 2 000 teachers and 2 000 nurses and doctors and fourthly, the creation of jobs. Through our rural recovery and urban rehabilitation programmes, we are financing over 3 million person days of work this year alone, and I should also refer to the rebuilding of infrastructure. The Commission, along with the Swedish government and Pakistan, has already started the emergency rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Kabul-Jalalabad-Torkham road and full reconstruction will start next year .
In addition, our humanitarian aid has helped to support the return of over 1.8 million refugees to Afghanistan. Over EUR 70 million has been spent by ECHO in 2002.
That means that the money which we have spent in total in Afghanistan over the last twelve months, the money which is voted by this Parliament, now stands at EUR 275 million. I do not think anybody can suggest that we have not played - or are not still playing - our full part so far in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
For 2003, the challenge will be to consolidate this early progress. The Commission will continue to play a leading role. We anticipate total development assistance of about EUR 185 million, and there will also be continued humanitarian assistance from ECHO of between EUR 45 and 55 million. That means that we will be spending in Afghanistan this year, on present estimates, between EUR 230 and 240 million. Colleagues will recall that at Tokyo on behalf of the Commission I pledged EUR 1 billion over five years in reconstruction assistance. That is not including the humanitarian assistance figures that I have mentioned, so the total contribution of the European Commission, from your taxpayers' money, to Afghanistan, quite apart from contributions from Member States, will be well in excess of EUR 1 billion for the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Some people in the past have derided that sort of work as nation-building or social work. Frankly, when I look back, I think if we had done more of it in the 1980s and 90s, we would not have the problems that we have had recently in Afghanistan.
Success in 2003 will hinge on three key issues. First, the need to improve internal security. Second, the need to ensure human rights are fully respected, including those of women and minorities. When I visited Kabul last year, one of the most moving visits that I paid was to a school in the extraordinary bomb site that is southern and western Kabul, where young women had returned to schooling for the first time in six years and were sitting in classrooms without blackboards, without textbooks, being taught physics. I must say the commitment and dedication of the staff, and of those young women, was remarkable: anybody who ever thought that it would have been right for us to stand by and allow Taliban rule to continue indefinitely should perhaps have been present on that occasion. The third key issue for us is the need for continued long-term commitment from donors and for effective coordination. The argument about coordination is one which has been extremely well made by Members of this Parliament, and I will say another word about it a little later if I may. Internal security is critical not only for the future of Afghanistan but also to the delivery of aid. Aid workers must be able to work without fear of recrimination. In this context, I would like to express my strong concern about the death of one aid worker, and the serious injury of two others, in Kabul just before Christmas. I think sometimes we underestimate the amounts of courage and commitment which are required for aid workers working in these sort of circumstances.
The next item is the report (A5-0421/2002) by Helmuth Markov, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the activities of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) (2002/2095(INI)).
Mr President, Mr Lemierre, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to begin by welcoming Mr Lemierre and his colleagues to the European Parliament, and take this opportunity to express my warm thanks to you and the Bank's staff for the extraordinarily positive cooperation which we were able to establish during the preparation of this report. The EBRD responded to me with great openness and willingness to cooperate, thus making my work on this report both interesting and informative. I was able to hold numerous discussions with representatives of the Bank as well as with project agencies from various countries, which gave me a detailed picture of the Bank's operations, its problems and successes, but also, and to a minor extent, its failures.
The EBRD is unique among development banks in having a political mandate. According to this mandate, its purpose is to foster the transition towards open market-oriented economies and to promote private and entrepreneurial initiative in the Central and Eastern European countries and CIS states committed to the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism and market economics. It is also part of the Bank's political mandate to promote, across the full range of its activities, environmentally sound and sustainable development. In my view, political guidelines governing the activities of other development banks would be desirable as well. Having scrutinised its operations, we can attest that the EBRD performs well in fulfilling its current mandate.
In selecting the projects to be funded, the EBRD prefers to be involved in small and medium-sized projects rather than promoting large-scale prestige projects. It shows great willingness to take risks through its commitment to projects which other banks deem too risky, but it does not systematically seek the security of state guarantees. A key focus of its activities is developing small and medium-sized businesses. The EBRD's micro-financing projects deserve particular mention in this context. Yet its high willingness to take risks does not take place at the expense of sound business management, as is borne out by the fact that it has always received the highest rating (triple A) from international rating agencies.
In my capacity as rapporteur, I would like to make a number of recommendations to the Bank, notwithstanding the positive assessment of its work overall. Although its activities focus primarily on the transitional promotion of private and public enterprise, its operations undoubtedly have macroeconomic effects. For this reason, an analysis of its operations should include economic data, which has not been the case to date. I am thinking especially of factors such as trends in employment, wages and salaries, productivity, company turnover, and so on. This will allow comparisons to be drawn between regions where the EBRD operates and regions where it does not operate, so that the influence of EBRD activities on macroeconomic development can be assessed.
In this context, it should also be a stated aim of the EBRD's operations to achieve synergy effects. Pursuing an integrated approach designed to help entire value-added chains in a region can contribute to promoting regional economic and social flows, thus facilitating sustainable development, which - as already mentioned - is one of the tasks defined in the Bank's mandate.
It is also, in my view, important to encourage the Bank to tailor its policies to local circumstances. Each country in which it operates has taken different decisions on its economic structures throughout the transformation process, especially as regards the division between the public and private sectors. The Bank therefore should not attempt to operate in the same way in every country. It would be a misinterpretation of the Bank's political mandate, were it to set itself up as the herald of ultra-liberalism and set itself the sole goal of promoting privatisation and uncontrolled liberalisation. It does not do so, but I want to point out that this risk must be controlled from the outset.
My report is a first for the European Parliament, since it is the first time that the operations of the EBRD have been subject to scrutiny and assessment by this House. This closes a gap which marked the EBRD out from other banks, such as the EIB, which has been subject to assessment by the EP for years. In future, a report on the EBRD will be presented to the European Parliament every two years. I think that with this own-initiative report, the foundation stone has been laid for positive and continuous cooperation between the Bank and the European Parliament.
Mr President, I should first like to congratulate Mr Markov on his report on the activities of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
In our view, the report gives an accurate account of the nature of the Bank's mandate and activities by identifying three features peculiar to it alone. Firstly, the Bank has both a political and an economic mandate. Secondly, it has implemented a policy of conditionality. In particular, this has affected the Bank's involvement in environmental issues, as Mr Markov mentioned. Lastly, there is the commitment to both the additionality and profitability of the funds made available. This requires the Bank to take on risks private operators would decline.
The pragmatic approach the EBRD brings to the interpretation of its mandate also features prominently in the report. This pragmatism has allowed the Bank to resolve a number of potential contradictions by adapting its political and economic framework to suit the stage of economic, cultural and social development attained by each country. It has also made it possible for the Bank to reassess its operational priorities and gradually build the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises or local financial institutions into these priorities. In addition, support for strategic international investors has been enhanced.
This same pragmatic approach has enabled the Bank, with the support of its shareholders, to adjust some of the limits to its mandate. For instance, within its general strategy, more importance is now attached to reform of the regulatory framework and to how efficiently it is implemented by local administrations and judicial authorities.
Mr Markov's report also rightly suggests placing additional emphasis on certain aspects of this pragmatic approach. One instance is more careful consideration of the social and political aspects of restructuring the productive sector. Another example is the reference to a more active role in the sustainable development of the energy sector. A further example is the reference to strengthening the Bank's operations at municipal level.
I should now like to say a few words about the relationship between the Union and the Bank. First, this is an entirely innovative relationship at the institutional level, since the EBRD is the only international institution of which the European Commission is a shareholder. This is particularly evident in the Board of Governors. The Member States and the Union's institutions together represent a majority when a vote is to be taken.
Cooperation between the Community and the Bank is another significant feature, and has developed considerably. I believe it is now extremely close, and takes many different forms. In particular, cooperation was strengthened through the Bank's active involvement in the pre-accession strategy. A network of working relationships between the services of the Commission and the Bank in now firmly established. This has resulted in a significant increase in that part of the Community budget devoted to supporting or cofinancing the Bank's projects. In the early 1990s it was estimated that this contribution amounted to approximately EUR 40 million. In recent years, however, it has increased to an average annual sum of EUR 300 million.
Finally, from the point of view of political priorities, cooperation with the Bank is indeed cause for satisfaction. It has allowed us to draw on two fundamental assets for which we are indebted to the Bank, or to make use of them so as to enhance European policies. The first of these is the Bank's competence in the region. This is due to its extensive knowledge of the current situation in the countries in question. The second is the Bank's practice of conditionality, which has often made it possible for the Bank's involvement to serve to promote compliance with European standards. This has been the case with regard to the environment.
In conclusion, I should simply like to emphasise that on the basis of these findings, it appears that the relationship between the Union and the Bank is bound to become even closer in all countries. Clearly, there is scope for further development of the Bank's activities in Russia, in other CIS States, and in the Balkans. It would also appear that there is scope for further involvement in the candidate countries following accession. In this connection, we endorse the view expressed in Mr Markov's report. We certainly believe it would be wise to continue active cooperation with the EBRD following enlargement, whilst also working with the obvious partner, namely the European Investment Bank. This will enable us to continue to benefit from the EBRD's experience after enlargement. It goes without saying that the degree of cooperation and the time periods involved will depend on the EBRD's capacity to respond to the actual needs identified in this area.
I am particularly pleased today to be able to welcome the President of the EBRD on an occasion which, as the rapporteur has remarked, is the first such encounter and dialogue on these terms between the EBRD and Parliament.
Mr President, I would first of all like to thank the European Parliament, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, and more particularly Mr Markov, for the attention that they have given to the EBRD. As you have said, this is a first and it is very important for the institution that I have the honour to chair.
This leads me to four brief and simple comments, since the report by Mr Markov and the proposals from Mr Solbes Mira have enlightened Parliament.
The first comment relates to the institution itself. The EBRD is an novel institution, first of all because it is recent and young; it has achieved some successes; it has also endured some failures and is always trying to learn. It is an institution in which the European states and the European Union have a large majority among the countries that operate the bank and many non-European countries - the United Sates, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Mexico, Egypt, Israel and Turkey, among others. We are talking about an institution in which Europe plays a most essential role with many partners. What is the basic element binding them? I think that there are two types.
First of all there is a very firm commitment to ensuring transition in the East. That is a commitment for everyone. We saw this when our strategy was updated for the coming years, with the commitment made by the non-Europeans to support the transition process in the future throughout the region, including in Central Europe. The second element is the principles, which were recalled by Mr Markov: joint financing with the private sector, the capacity to take risks in order to encourage the private sector to move the market economy forward, and at the same time not competing with the private sector. These principles of additionality, conditionality and impact on transition are the real foundations of the institution. I must also mention a third dimension, which Mr Markov referred to just now, which is its political dimension. The EBRD has a political mandate. We are charged with ensuring the progression of the market economy, but also of democracy, which leads us, following internal debates in the Board of Directors, the conclusions of which are made public, to take decisions such as reducing and almost halting our contributions in countries such as Belarus and Turkmenistan.
My second comment concerns experience acquired and strategy, as Mr Markov described. Currently, the bank is achieving high levels of assistance. Last year, we invested EUR 3.9 billion, which is the bank's highest level of assistance. Over a period of around ten years, we have helped to attract EUR 70 to 80 billion of investment to the East, which represents an extremely high proportion of the flow of investment in the East. We are also implementing the strategy adopted by the Bank's shareholders, which is development towards the East.
We are maintaining a strong commitment in Central Europe. For obvious reasons, you are aware of the situation in Central Europe, and I had the opportunity to discuss it at length with Commissioner Solbes Mira; there is a considerable need for investment and, in particular, budgetary pressure can only be reduced through a high volume of investment. This is, of course, very important to the EBRD, as it is focused on priority objectives such as financing SMEs, financing medium-sized enterprises, industrial restructuring and regional development. We do of course largely consider ourselves as an agency for implementing projects for the Commission and the European Union, and we are currently developing our activities in the South East - the Balkans, the Caucasus, Ukraine, Romania and Bulgaria, and particularly in Russia.
My second comment regarding strategy concerns the importance we attach to the development of small enterprises, micro-enterprises and SMEs.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 16 January 2003.
Madam President, I should like to know whether a dress code has been introduced here in Parliament. I am thinking of something that happened yesterday during a hearing concerning the Takeover Directive. The Chairman of the hearing, Mr Gargani, asked the officers to ensure that all the men put jackets on out of respect for the experts present, as he put it. Since my assistant had no jacket or tie on, he was asked to leave the hearing and was therefore unable to do his work, a fact I am very unhappy about.
I should like to know if there is a new practice in Parliament. For your information, I can point out that I am wearing neither a tie, shirt nor jacket. As a matter of fact, I am wearing jeans, so I would ask you: do I have permission to be here as an MEP?
Mr Blak, I will make inquiries into that matter. I note your upset with regard to your assistant.
Regarding the balance, you are welcome to be here, but after the sitting I would be happy to recommend you a good tailor.
The next item is the statement by the High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy on the situation in Iraq.
(Members on the centre and left held up placards reading 'No to war' and 'Yes to old Europe')
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as always, it is a great honour for me to take part in a sitting of the European Parliament. But although it is always a pleasure, I must tell you that today is also a moment of great concern for me.
Mr Solana, I apologise for interrupting your introduction. Colleagues, I think you have made your point. I would appreciate it if you would put down your placards so that we can proceed with the debate.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I was saying that I am always happy to appear before you, but today I am doing so at a time when I am extremely worried.
The international situation is not good and the time has come for us to hold a debate within this institution to consider how the most burning issues currently on the international scene can be viewed, and if possible resolved, from a European perspective.
I have seen the placards that some Members of this Parliament have displayed very clearly, and I would like to say that unfortunately, or fortunately in other respects, I am talking to you from the point of view of an old Europe, because of my age, but also because of my affection for everything which is represented by the Europe of yesterday, the Europe of today and the Europe of tomorrow.
Mr President, do not imagine that I am so old, I am going to carry on working and pestering people for a few more years.
Mr President, in the short time available to me this afternoon, if the honourable Members will allow me, I would like to discuss four or five points which I believe are essential to a global understanding of the international situation. The first is undoubtedly Iraq. But I would also like to take this opportunity to debate with you, if only very briefly, the situation in the Middle East on such an important day as this, the day after the elections in Israel. I also believe it would be a mistake not to say a few words about North Korea, given the dramatic situation at the moment, and I will end with a very brief comment on the operations the European Union is beginning to plan for the deployment of forces in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
I will begin with the first point: the situation in Iraq. As you know, ladies and gentlemen, the General Affairs Council is taking place this week and next week and they are going to be extremely important weeks in terms of finding a solution to the Iraq crisis. On Monday morning, for the first time, there was a concertation procedure, in accordance with Article 19 of the EU Treaty, between the Presidency, the troika and the members of the European Union sitting on the United Nations Security Council here in Brussels at ministerial level. This is the first time that anything of this nature has taken place; there had been many concertation meetings in New York, but there had never been a meeting here in Brussels at ministerial level of the two permanent members and the two non-permanent members of the Security Council together with the Presidency, Commissioner Patten and myself.
I would like to say very briefly that in the meeting there was general consensus at least on four essential points which the European Union wishes to defend in all fora. I will run through the four points, although the honourable Members know them very well. Firstly: we all have an interest in Iraq getting rid of weapons of mass destruction and this is something that all Europeans should agree on. One of the most serious problems we are going to face during this century is unquestionably the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. And we Europeans cannot ignore this problem, a serious problem for which a solution must be found. Therefore, to try, by every means possible, and in accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council, to ensure that Baghdad gets rid of all weapons of mass destruction must be a priority for the European Union.
The second important point is Iraq's responsibility to cooperate actively with the inspectors. You have good knowledge of the report which Dr Blix and Mr ElBaradei presented the other day to the Security Council, and you saw them directly, because the President of the European Parliament had the opportunity to speak with the inspection chiefs by means of a videoconference with New York. I also had the opportunity to speak with them subsequently, and I will therefore not insist on this since I am sure that the Presidency has informed Parliament in a clear manner.
The third point, which I believe is essential to point out, is that we must give all the necessary support to the inspectors. The inspectors are the eyes and ears of the international community. If they are capable of convincing the Security Council of the situation, I am sure that the Security Council will also convince public opinion of the current situation in Baghdad. Therefore, whatever the implicit or explicit requests - and I insist, implicit or explicit - of the inspectors to the members of the Security Council, I believe Europe should help them. And there are essentially three types of suggestions or requests that the inspectors could make to us, firstly: that they require more resources, more resources than they currently have, more inspectors and more logistical resources; secondly: they may need more time; and thirdly: they may need more information or more intelligence. I believe that the international community should respond positively to these three requests from the inspectors. In other words, they should be offered resources, time and intelligence.
And the fourth point, which I believe is absolutely essential and which must be defended by the Europeans, is that the whole of this process relating to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and more specifically the issue of Iraq, must remain within the framework of the United Nations Security Council. It must be carried out within the framework of the United Nations, which is the institution which must provide the legitimacy for any action in relation to this issue.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr President, you are well aware of the differing positions expressed by various Members of the European Union, but you also know that there are not just the opinions of the leaders in the European Union, but we also have clear and convincing surveys of the thoughts of the European citizens. I believe that the European citizens are clear about two things: one, that they do not want war; and the other, that they do not want dictators in the world. And we must make the two things compatible in the eyes of the population, of the citizens of Europe. How to make preventing armed conflicts and preventing the existence of dictators compatible is the great challenge facing the international community. Our intention as Europeans must be to ensure that Resolution 1441, which was unanimously approved by the United Nations Security Council and which was approved unanimously by the Arab League two days later, should become a reality and that Saddam Hussein and the Iraqi regime can disarm without the need for military force.
World hunger and the elimination of barriers to trade with the poorest countries
The next item is the Commission statement on world hunger and the elimination of barriers to trade with the poorest countries.
Mr President, I very much regret that the Commissioner is unable to be with us. It seems to me that it might be wise to adjust our arrangements so that the Commissioner himself could read the text to be adopted. He ought to see the agreements reached in the common resolution through. We would then transcend mere words.
I am sure we all agree that the terrible scourge of hunger in the world casts shame on all those who are in a position to prevent it. The figures speak for themselves. We are all aware of the alarming statistics. Nonetheless, I believe they bear repetition. I would venture to say that we are numbered amongst the lucky few who live comfortably, in an affluent society. Meanwhile, 900 people die of hunger every hour. In addition, 800 million people are malnourished and 300 of these are children.
What is worse, the numbers remain stubbornly high and we are light years away from reaching the target of halving the number of malnourished people by the year 2015. That was the date set at the 1996 World Food Summit and confirmed in the Millennium Declaration. It is not a particularly ambitious target. Nonetheless, we are unlikely to reach it despite the fact that a number of countries have made determined efforts to reduce poverty and improve food safety.
The current state of affairs as portrayed by these statistics proves beyond all doubt that the time for words and for grand declarations is long since past, particularly if account is also taken of the implications of malnutrition and their negative impact on development in the countries concerned. Hunger cannot wait. The time has come to take a quantum leap as regards the strategy needed to rid ourselves of this scourge. We need to go to the very root of the problem if we are to deal with the structural causes of world hunger.
Tackling the root of the problem and going beyond the current crisis means making human development a priority. A two-pronged approach is called for. In the short and medium term it is necessary to focus on food safety and food sovereignty, crucial to alleviating present-day hunger. In the longer term, sustainable growth for less-developed countries must be promoted.
The purpose of such a two-pronged approach would be to help establish the social, political and economic framework needed to allow those countries to eliminate poverty and start down the road to development. The causes of hunger and underdevelopment are many and varied. Consequently, a wide range of remedies must be deployed in the effort to reach these twin targets. All the factors contributing to hunger need to be dealt with.
Natural disasters, droughts, floods and desertification are but some of these factors. Others include armed conflicts, civil unrest, political, social and economic upheavals, the AIDS pandemic and the foreign debt incurred by the poorest countries.
Two main courses of action can be identified. On the one hand, regarding food sovereignty, it is essential to promote small-scale farming of sustainable and diversified crops. This is provided for in the common resolution we trust will be approved in plenary. Urgent action must also be taken to ensure the development of viable networks for local distribution, access to land and to water and the cancellation of foreign debt.
Turning to the reduction of poverty and with development in mind, priority should be given to education. I mean education for all, girls included. Girls tend to be excluded from educational programmes as a matter of course, and are thus also excluded from all potential development of their countries. Increased technological capacity should also be fostered as part of this drive towards education and training. By technological capacity I am referring in particular to productive capacity. Efforts to combat diseases linked to poverty, notably AIDS, must be stepped up. What I actually have in mind are all the measures designed to promote good governance and the rule of law. As indicated in our resolution, I also believe it is particularly important to facilitate access to the markets on equal terms, and on a reciprocal basis. Measures that distort trade should gradually be done away with. More specifically, as is also stated in the resolution and in line with the agreements reached at Doha, I believe agricultural subsidies should be eliminated. I am not referring merely to the European Union. After all, the Union's market is the most accessible to the less developed countries. Rather, I am thinking of the whole international community, especially the richer industrialised countries.
If we are to set the less developed countries on course for sustainable development to eliminate hunger we cannot shy away from these measures. They are essential and have to be taken. Peace itself is at stake, at both a social and international level.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there is nobody here who cannot see that the world is divided by a gulf separating those who have food from those who are hungry, those who can read and write from those who are illiterate, those who have access to healthcare from those who are not entitled to this. There have been countless statistical reports. The most recent, the report by the World Food Programme, warns us that 38 million people are likely to die from lack of food, drinking water and medicines in the coming months. Yet we must openly admit that the international community is not yet doing enough. This is not the central item on our political agenda, as it should be. This is not the main criterion considered by the Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the G8 in their actions. If we do not change our approach and speed up our action, if we do not succeed in regulating the globalisation processes with environmental and social sustainability, the historians of the future will judge our civilisation very harshly for this failure.
Let us focus on the diseases related to poverty, on malaria and tuberculosis. Let us consider AIDS, a scourge which has already claimed 25 million victims, let us remember the 14 000 people throughout the world who contract the HIV virus every day. Prevention is essential but it is not everything. It will be difficult to find excuses in the future for the fact that we do not succeed in treating 95% of the people suffering from AIDS. It will seem a real crime, considering that modern medicine can do a great deal to change AIDS from a terminal disease into a chronic condition and, in particular, to reduce the risk of transmission from mother to child. Therefore, the European Union must put active pressure on the United States so that an agreement can, at last, be reached to exclude from intellectual property rights and patentability those drugs which, if used freely, will save the lives of millions of people. This would go hand in hand with the intention to give a greater financial undertaking and with this draft regulation, which we hope will be adopted without delay at first reading.
Similarly, the decision to grant free access to the European market to products from less developed countries is important. The European Union must now shoulder the responsibility of expressing the principles and positions we are discussing today in all international fora, starting with the World Trade Organisation. Only thus, with a new form of governance on a world-wide scale, with greater participation and transparency, with practical decisions and measures, will we be able to combat hunger and poverty and win this challenge, the greatest challenge facing mankind.
Mr President, since the attention of the world is focused on the huge crisis of Iraq, it is the duty of Parliament and of all people of good will to shift considerable attention back onto the issue of combating hunger, as the European Parliament is striving to do today, not least in the light of the - I am sad to say, disappointing - results of the most recent summits, the most recent international talks. Quite frankly, I would include among these the difficulty of converting a genuine impetus generated by many non-governmental organisations for rapid change and for a policy of assembling critical voices into a positive drive for change and reform, and, in this regard, I would refer to the recent statements of the President of the World Bank, James Wolfensohn, who both calls upon the institutions to do more and calls upon civil society to direct its critical gaze at the shortcomings of globalisation in a constructive way, setting substantial goals.
I would point out that it is right, including in the instrument before Parliament today too, for greater attention to be given to the dreadful situation in some parts of Africa, particularly Ethiopia, where some millions of people are in real danger of losing their lives. It is clear to all - and the document we are about to adopt illustrates this well - that the situation can only be improved by correcting and modifying the structural errors and dreadful inadequacies of many governments which have continued to channel their money in the wrong direction, despite the fact that experience has shown, in the light of the facts, that it is necessary to change their approach in order to eliminate the root causes of poverty, the root causes of hunger and malnutrition and the lack of information whose consequences are an appalling health crisis and the denial of education and training to tens or hundreds of millions of people. Moreover, it is clear to all that, in many cases, barriers to trade are another key factor which needs to be eliminated. That would bring more freedom and, therefore, greater competition and more opportunities in addition to urgently-needed humanitarian measures. This is what the European Parliament is striving for, and I believe we must all support it today.
Mr President, the world's food situation is indeed tragic and is growing increasingly serious. Millions of human beings live in extreme poverty and every hour of the day many die of hunger. It is therefore crucial that rapid and far-reaching measures are adopted in order to put an end to this situation, which must surely weigh on humanity's conscience.
It is therefore crucial that we adopt structural measures that are capable of preventing conflicts arising. It is equally crucial to follow up these fundamental measures with emergency measures to save lives now. The emergency humanitarian aid that has been provided to date has proved to be inadequate, where both food and medical supplies are concerned. We must, for example, provide a more substantial response to campaigns for high-risk areas, such as the awareness-raising campaign 'Hunger in Africa', launched by the World Food Programme. We must also support timely initiatives such as those launched very recently by the new president of Brazil, Lula da Silva, both the initiative intended to eliminate hunger in his country, with the programme 'Zero Hunger' and the other initiative presented in Davos, which is of a universal nature and calls for an international fund to be created to combat poverty and hunger in the countries of the developing world.
It is equally crucial however, as I mentioned previously, that fundamental measures are adopted, breaking first of all with a model that has proven to be inadequate and unfair, which places the least developed countries in an inferior position and treats them shabbily - particularly by claiming that everything can be resolved through trade - which perpetuates an unfair system of trade that attaches sole priority to economic growth and ignores the importance of a fair distribution of the wealth that is created.
We need a new world economic order, in particular one that contains profound changes in the bodies that are today crucial and which have guidelines that are out of kilter, such as the WTO, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. A definitive solution must be found to the problem of debt and it is particularly necessary to ensure stable prices that compensate for the traditional forms of production in the least developed countries, mainly in the primary sector. Priority must also be given to food sovereignty and food safety, in particular by guaranteeing that natural and human resources are harnessed and that people have access to land and water.
Mr President, there is famine upon famine in Africa. We are appalled to see children dying of hunger, but we do not tackle the causes. Famines are the result not only of weather conditions but also of the structural policies, especially agricultural and trade policies, which have led farmers in poorer countries to produce for export rather than for local consumption.
The use of food aid is not a viable solution. Though claiming to be humanitarian, it has often been used by rich countries as a way of disposing of their agricultural surplus and of legitimising their devastating policy of over-production. Thus, the United States is keen to send to Africa its GMOs, which are being boycotted on the European market, not only in the form of food but also as seeds. It then has the audacity to accuse governments which refuse this aid of allowing their populations to die. To use such blackmail on vulnerable people is shameful. It goes against the fundamental right to food, which gives all human beings the freedom to choose what they eat. Who is the more guilty here? Is it the countries affected by famine who refuse to feed their people with potentially harmful products, or is it the countries who supply aid to deprived people only in the form of genetically modified seed, the consequences of which will be disastrous for the environment and for biodiversity?
In some of these countries or regions, the food crisis is not a general crisis. The problem is not necessarily the lack of food, but rather the fact that it is not distributed fairly throughout the world. Only local production and intra-regional trade are sustainable and able to guarantee access to food for everyone. The European Union, however, extols the virtues of free trade at world level and forces the developing countries to open their markets. In return, it promises to open its market to all products from the least developed countries, except arms - and, of course, bananas, and sugar and the rest. Not only has this measure caused competition between developing countries rather than strengthening their market shares, it is also encouraging the production of crops for export, to the detriment of food crops that would enable them to be self-sufficient. In the same way, the current crisis among coffee producers is a reminder that free trade means that small farmers are being ruined while the big multinationals prosper. Free trade is not fair trade. Moreover, there is no reference to fair trade in the new Commission Communication entitled 'Trade and development', which Parliament will shortly have occasion to examine. President Lula made the fight against hunger his top priority. He is proposing to create an international fund for this purpose. That is also the objective of the FAO, whose recent summit does not seem to have had any significant impact.
In the opinion of the Greens, the only way of eradicating hunger throughout the world is by the sustainable development of food production which is based on the needs of local populations, and fair trade between North and South - in other words, trade which pays a fair price that reflects the social and environmental costs of production and the resources and workers of poorer countries.
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 30 January 2003.
Last Saturday, Mr Joseba Pagazaurtundua, head of the municipal police in a village in the Basque country in Spain, was shot dead by a terrorist. On my own behalf and on behalf of this House, I have already conveyed our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to his family.
Mr Pagazaurtundua was an active member of the Socialist Party. He was also an active member of the Basque citizen's initiative, Basta Ya! - 'Enough is enough'. Basta Ya! won the Sakharov Prize in 2000 and Mr Pagazaurtundua came to our Parliament to attend the Sakharov prize-giving ceremony at that time. By murdering him the terrorists have shown once more their denial of the right to life and their contempt for the right to freedom of political expression.
After this latest affront to decency we, in the European Parliament, wish to say today that we stand shoulder to shoulder with the victims, with their families and with those who are combating terrorism in Spain. I ask you, please, to observe one minute's silence.
The Minutes of the sitting of Thursday, 30 January 2003 have been distributed.
Mr President, I am taking the floor to point out to you a problem concerning compliance with the Rules of Procedure in the verbatim report of 30 January 2003, in the debate on world hunger and the elimination of barriers to trade with the poorest countries.
On page 15 of the verbatim report there is a written declaration by Mr Van Hecke of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, presented pursuant to Rule 120(7). This declaration is 357 words long, whereas the Rules of Procedure stipulate, and I quote: 'Members who have not spoken in a debate may, at most once per part-session, hand in a written statement of not more than 200 words that shall be appended to the verbatim report of the debate'.
Whereas I myself made the effort to comply with the Rules of Procedure on this point in my written declaration on the same debate, and one of my previous written declarations was abbreviated precisely on the basis of this Rule, I am surprised and I wonder whether there might be two sets of checks and balances in this House with regard to the application of the Rules of Procedure. May I ask for the Rules of Procedure to be applied in this case?
To the best of my knowledge a moderate degree of flexibility is shown. It is, however, a matter of concern that the Rules of Procedure be strictly applied. If, as a result, an amendment needs to be made to that effect, let us do that. Subject to that observation, the Minutes are approved.
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 6 February 2003 has been distributed. The following change has been proposed:
I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left to include in Wednesday's agenda, without motions for resolutions, statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Iraq .
If this request is accepted the debate on Iraq could be included on Wednesday from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. The other debates that afternoon would continue from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and Council Question Time would therefore be cancelled.
Mr President, my group has drawn up this request not just in view of the development of events, but essentially in view of the fact that the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Simitis, has called an extraordinary summit, which may be held next Monday. And we believe it is very important at this moment - and this is the approach my group has taken throughout this debate and we believe it must continue - to try to achieve a united and decisive European position in order to ensure, essentially, that the war is not inevitable and in order to achieve a disarmament process - in relation to weapons of mass destruction, in the case of Iraq - which takes place under international pressure under the auspices of the United Nations.
This is our objective and we believe it is important that Parliament can hold a debate so that you can speak for us at the summit next Monday.
Mr President, I do not want to oppose a debate on Iraq, but your proposal involves cancelling Question Time in order to have one, and I very much want to put my opposition to that on the record, taking as I do the view that every individual MEP's right to put questions - enshrined, indeed, in the treaties - is one of the most important parliamentary rights, second only to the right to vote on legislative texts. We are becoming accustomed to important matters - it is always important matters - ever more frequently reducing or doing away with the time available for questions. I ask you to put a stop to this practice. Questions to the Council used to be held at 9 p.m., or from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m., and for ten to fifteen years that worked perfectly, until the Council decided it was tired in the evenings and had to leave, so that Question Time was moved to the afternoon, and since then, Question Time has been cut back or moved, always to make room for other items of business.
I ask you to take a long-term approach to this problem, and to sort it out.
Mr Posselt, your observation was more a point of order regarding Question Time. I specifically asked the House to take account of the fact that if we add the debate as requested, it would have the knock-on effect you mention.
The next item is the report (A5-0009/2003) by Mr Santini, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States [COM(2001) 257 - C5-0336/2001 - 2001/0111(COD)].
Madam President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Santini, and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, for this very positive report.
The report concerns a long-awaited proposal for a directive which is crucial for facilitating the free movement of persons and which takes into account the work carried out at the end of the 1990s, in particular by the high level panel chaired by Mrs Simone Veil, on citizenship of the European Union.
This proposal lays down the conditions governing the exercise of the fundamental right of free movement and residence, which is conferred directly to every EU citizen by the Treaty and enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. In this respect the proposal represents a first step towards defining a strong concept of citizenship of the European Union, as confirmed by the basic aim of the proposal.
EU citizens should mutatis mutandis be able to move between Member States on similar terms as nationals of a Member State moving around or changing their place of residence in their own country. In particular the directive should facilitate the exercise of the right to free movement by reducing administrative formalities to what is absolutely necessary, by better defining the situation of family members, by introducing a permanent right of residence after four years of uninterrupted residence in the host Member State, and by further restricting the scope for refusing or terminating residence on grounds of public order.
The proposal also introduces important innovations by comparison to the existing acquis. In particular it extends from three to six months the period during which citizens are not subject to any formalities other than the possession of a valid identity card or passport. It suppresses the obligation to obtain a residence permit for European Union citizens, replacing it with straightforward registration with the competent authorities, which is already the case in some Member States. It establishes a system in which the European Union citizen has simply to declare that he fulfils the conditions linked to the exercise of the right of residence. Finally, it introduces after four years of uninterrupted residence a permanent right of residence which is no longer subject to any conditions.
As is rightly underlined in Mr Santini's report, the right to free movement is still subject today to many obstacles. This has been confirmed in the repeated judgments of the Court of Justice on the matter. This proposal incorporates the clarifications made by the Court's recent decisions and, once adopted, it should considerably simplify the exercise of the fundamental rights of every European citizen.
. (IT) Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for this introduction, which paves the way for the presentation of my report. Indeed, the directive we are discussing represents a genuine leap forward in the debate on citizenship of the Union and the free movement of persons. For the first time, the citizen is recognised as having rights not just as an economic entity but as a person, as the holder of individual rights which, together with general rights, make up European citizenship. The rights of free movement and residence derive directly from the European Treaty, they have long been established, as the Commissioner said, and they confer on the citizens new, major fundamental rights. Indeed, one might say that this directive lays the foundations of dual citizenship - national and European citizenship - as formulated in the draft Treaty discussed in the Convention too. The introduction of the right to permanent residence is a concrete example of this.
Before looking at the directive in more detail, we should specify its scope. It is directed at Community citizens and members of their families, of whatever nationality. The principle of equal treatment of third citizens who are members of a Community family has been established since the sixties and the directive makes it even more efficient and effective.
This is a right derived from the right of the Community citizen of whose family they are members. It must be made clear from the outset that this directive does not apply to the citizens of third countries or, in any case, not to those who are not related to Community citizens, even if they are living in a Member State or enjoy free movement within the Union.
The great merit of this directive is that it combines all the previous provisions on the subject in a single text. Another merit is its clarity and, in this regard, I feel that some of the rapporteur's amendments, not least, have helped to simplify the excessively bureaucratic sections as far as is possible.
The most innovative elements include the proposal to replace the residence card, as the Commissioner mentioned, with a simple certificate of registration with the competent authorities. The registration procedures must be straightforward and direct and, in any case, the principle of self-certification must be applied, as it already is in some Member States. The principle of self-certification must also apply to the provision of proof of income and health insurance cover too. In the case of family members who are third-country nationals, an identity document must be supplied in order to prove the existence of a family relationship, purely in order to prevent abuses, which are always possible.
A further innovative principle introduced by the directive concerns the expulsion of third country citizens who are entitled to residence on Community territory. The directive stipulates that they cannot be expelled under any circumstances whatsoever. This approach applies the 'Amsterdam objective', namely the creation of a border-free area of freedom, security and justice, but some of the Member States will probably want to establish their own rules on this matter.
I have saved the most controversial issue until last, as always happens when debates are introduced in this Chamber: the family, its composition and the definitions of couple and spouse. To avoid such a vast wealth of innovative legislation being hijacked by the usual tug of war, as rapporteur, I have striven to be as open as possible, stretching my principles and the principles of the political group I represent to the limits in the interests of completing the process with the directive intact. Moreover, there is no ambiguity over the definition of spouse in terms of Community law, as the Court of Justice has confirmed on a number of occasions. In this connection and in relation to unmarried couples too, the rapporteur has appropriated a number of amendments tabled and then withdrawn by the Group of the Party of European Socialists, which appeal to the laws of the different Member States with a view to putting an end to the discrepancies which still exist at Community level. In my opinion, this democratic appeal to subsidiarity, to national sovereignty, respects all interests and should avoid the usual crusades which could well diminish the content of the report and render its scope ineffective. In short, each Member State can regulate family issues on the basis of its own legislation and concerns. It would be a real shame if we were unable to succeed in delivering a worthy text enjoying broad support to the Council, considering the marvellous opportunity of codecision we have on this matter. Moreover, it is inconceivable that we should impose on 13 States a model supported by only two of them, or that priority should be given to symbols and dogmas rather than responsible rules awaited by millions of citizens who want to be able to organise their lives.
To sum up, it has to be said that the rapporteur's approach is, for the most part, in line with that of the Commission, which has produced a coherent, objective text which, as we already know, also expresses the Council's position. We have the opportunity to give the citizens new, modern rules which provide greater guarantees of civil liberties. I am confident that they will be adopted at the vote in this Chamber and I would like to thank the committee draftsmen and all the Members who have contributed to the report with their amendments, which have, without a doubt, improved the content of the directive.
Madam President, European citizenship was one of the great achievements of the Union Treaty adopted in Nice in 1992.
In accordance with the judgments of the Court of Justice, the rights of European citizenship, including the right to free movement and residence within the Union, were fundamental rights of European citizens, whose recognition did not require any legislative implementation.
In accordance with this legal basis, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market considered that there was no reason for the establishment of restrictions of an administrative nature, either for entry into a country or for free movement and residence.
Much progress has been made in the field of legislative organisation by means of the Schengen Agreements, but it is the case that certain countries are still resisting this progress and are not participating in it.
Therefore, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market hoped that this proposal for a directive would represent an effective step forward by removing all the restrictions in terms of administration and content to a citizen's ability to establish themselves in another Community country.
This was the purpose of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
The amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market were not accepted by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and the rapporteur would naturally like them to be maintained, but has not insisted, in order not to jeopardise the agreements reached in this field.
I would like to draw attention to an amendment, however, which could to a certain extent respond to the concerns of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market. I am referring to Amendment No 23 - which introduces a new Article 4(b) - which says that 'This Directive shall not lead to the withdrawal of existing rights established by the legislation of the European Union or Court of Justice decision'.
I believe this amendment is essential if we do not want to move backwards in terms of the rights of European citizens within the Union.
Madam President, the Commission proposal for a directive on the right of citizens to move freely is, without doubt, an important step in removing the unjustified technical obstacles that persist even in united Europe. The proposed amendments submitted by the European Parliament have of course improved the Commission's proposal significantly. The amendments submitted by the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities aim to bring about a number of improvements to reinforce the free movement of women, taking account of the specific problems faced by women and the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of gender.
Unfortunately, Commissioner, your ambition to allow European citizens to exercise their right of residence freely and without impediment has not resulted in a text that is gender neutral and takes account of the specific problems faced by women. The main problem concerns women who are economically dependent on their husbands and who, in the event of death or separation, have no prospects of extending their right or continuing to reside in another European country. In other words, they are automatically deprived of any legal rights derived from their residing in another Member State of the Union. We feel this needs correcting.
